Title: Using the Mimi codec for metalinguistic representations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15799v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:35:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Using the Mimi codec for metalinguistic representations 

Artem Saloev 1, Erin Pacquetet 2, Nicolas Ballier 11ALTAE, Université Paris Cité, F-75013 Paris, France 

> 2

SCIAM, 10 rue de Penthièvre, F-75008 Paris, France 

artem.saloev@gmail.com, erin.pacquetet@sciam.fr, nicolas.ballier@u-pariscite.fr 

Abstract 

Codec-based audio language models are de-veloping, but little explainability research has been dedicated to the representation of this type of speech tokenisation. In this paper, we fo-cus on the dictionary of 2048 tokens used in Mimi’s semantic token codebook, the neural codec of the Moshi language model (Défossez et al., 2024). We show that the ABX experi-ment carried out with Mimi fails to capture the mapping of the semantic tokens to phone reali-sations. By realigning Mimi’s representations to the TIMIT corpus transcriptions (Garofolo et al., 1993), we show that the 2048 tokens IDs of the semantic codebook map to quadphone, triphone, biphone, phone and subphone reali-sations. We used the TIMIT transcriptions as evidence of the validity of the allophone-based representations of these 80ms semantic token representation and examine some of the the-oretical consequences for the tokenisation of speech at allophone and subphonemic level. 

1 Introduction 

Codec-based audio language models have recently emerged as a way to apply Transformer-style se-quence modelling to speech by first turning the waveform into a stream of discrete codec tokens. A neural audio codec compresses the signal using multiple codebooks, or layers (typically via resid-ual vector quantisation, RVQ), yielding a small number of tokens per frame; a Transformer is then trained to predict token sequences, and a decoder reconstructs the waveform from those predictions. Working with discrete audio tokens brings bene-fits: stable long-context modelling, controllable bit-rate and latency (via tokens per second and the number of codebooks used), and, in some designs, faster generation by predicting coarse levels first and refining finer details in parallel. This type of technology is increasingly used for conversational agents or speech-to-speech translations (Labiausse et al., 2025) but little is known about how voices and speech features are encoded in these neural audio codecs. As conversational agents aim at real-time interactions and reducing latency, this has led to the design of codecs with limited frame rates (in our case study, 80 ms frames). While this design is undoubtedly motivated by engineering considera-tions, the decision to discretise a naturally continu-ous acoustic signal raises a fundamental question : do the learned audio tokens partition the signal in ways that align with the categories posited by phonology (and, more broadly, phonetics)? An-swering this question is central both to analysing these models’ internal representations and to assess-ing whether there is an alternative way to model the phon* level. Our goal in this paper is to test how far the two representations coincide. We focus on Mimi, a recent streaming neural codec that produces multi-level token sequences suitable for spoken-dialogue modelling. Using TIMIT (the standard testbed for the phonetics of American English and its compu-tational modeling), with its time-aligned phonetic transcriptions, we ask whether Mimi’s codebook tokens can be mapped onto the manually identified phonemes. This seemingly simple mapping raises immediate practical difficulties: token frames and phoneme boundaries are not naturally aligned; to-kens have a fixed frame rate, whereas phoneme durations vary with context; and some informa-tion relevant to segment identity may be distributed across levels. The audio language model Moshi generates and encodes speech as discrete audio to-kens using a neural audio codec called “Mimi” 1.The Mimi codec quantizes audio waveforms into these tokens. It operates at a frame rate of 12.5 Hz (frames per second). This means that each “tempo-ral frame” of audio processed by Moshi, and thus each time step for the Temporal Transformer, corre-

> 1https://huggingface.co/kyutai/mimi

1arXiv:2608.15799v1 [cs.CL] 16 Aug 2026 sponds to an 80-millisecond (ms) slice of audio (1 second / 12.5 Hz = 0.08 seconds or 80 ms). Moshi’s design integrates the generation of both acoustic and semantic tokens within Mimi. Rather than hav-ing a completely separate semantic token codebook, Mimi’s architecture is designed to distill semantic information into a specific part of its quantization process, effectively creating semantic-rich tokens. Mimi discretizes waveforms into audio tokens from a self-supervised speech model, WavLM (Chen et al., 2022), into tokens. This allows for stream-ing encoding and decoding of semantic-acoustic tokens. WavLM (Chen et al., 2022) was trained on English with Gigaspeech (Chen et al., 2021) and on the 23 languages of the European Parliament with the VoxPopuli Dataset (Wang et al., 2021b). Our approach is bottom-up in spirit. We assume each 80 ms interval of audio is encoded by a single token in the Mimi codec encoder. We map codebook_0 tokens (the semantic token codebook) to each 80 ms interval and re-align these intervals with the phone-aligned data of the TIMIT corpus. Because an 80 ms token may not capture the phone level, we cannot rely on the Phone Error Rate (PER) metric (an alternative reason being we have a dictionary of 2048 tokens for a 72 phone set). Based on standard studies of phone durations in English speech (Keat-ing et al., 1992; Byrd, 1992; Keating et al., 1994), a plausible hypothesis is that an 80ms time frame is likely to capture triphones, biphones, phones and “subphones” (in particular, fragments of vowels). We partially replicate previous analyses of codecs that have been used for example with SpeechTo-kenizer (Zhang et al., 2024): we have used the TIMIT training data to match the Mimi semantic codebook token representations to TIMIT phonetic data transcriptions at phone level, word level and utterance level. We found the word-aligned tran-scriptions to be the most relevant to capture the gist of the semantic token representations, providing cogent representations of word allophone networks proposed in the early days of the TIMIT analyses. We have also used this available resource on En-glish with the belief that the semantic codebook representations could be used to partially repli-cate previous phonetic analyses on the TIMIT data (Keating et al., 1992; Byrd, 1992; Keating et al., 1994; Byrd, 1994) in the future, leading to extract-ing features for phone recognition tasks (Young and Woodland, 1994), dialectology (Clopper and Pisoni, 2004b,a) and computational dialectology (Miller and Trischitta, 1996). For example, when 

> Figure 1: Levels of granularity in the Tyneside Linguis-tic Survey, from (Jones-Sargent, 1985)

investigating the phonetic realizations of Geordie (Newcastle English) in the 1960s for the Tyneside Linguistic Survey, linguists tried to annotate dif-ferent levels of analysis. They considered as the major arch category the OU, the overall unit, and this more or less corresponds to the phonological level with the assumption that this abstraction cor-responds to the class of realizations. In that respect, the mapping of the phonological category was not single-handedly over to the notion of phonetic real-izations as diacritics, but was conceived as a form of several types of realizations. The PDV, the Pu-tative Disystemic Variable, which assumes that a form of sub-categorization can be proposed to ac-count for the different states, would correspond to individual realization, for example, as encountered in some specific lexical examples. So it might be the case that codec tokens could be very similar to the code that was associated in the transcription of the corpus that was coded on the basis of the four-digit code (see Figure 1). The (MIMI) codec tokens, if consistently encoding a portion of the acoustic signal bijectively could be used to encode the extreme level of granularity of the phonetic representation. Another potential application of this property would be the automatic annotation of code-switching. There are two main contributions in our pa-per. First, we establish a preliminary inventory of Mimi’s “semantic” tokens observable in the TIMIT data with a method and code that can be replicated with the other 23 languages used to train the Mimi NAC. Second, we discuss the theoretical conse-quences of this type of speech tokenisation and evidence some of the potential benefits for the pho-netic community of this type of “semantic” (indeed, allophonic) tokens. The rest of the paper is organ-ised as follows: Section 2 presents the main NACs that have been previously been investigated. Sec-tion 3 explains how we have analysed the Mimi 2codebook and how we organised the mapping of the semantic tokens with the TIMIT training data. Section 4 presents our results, Section 5 discusses these results and Section ?? suggests future re-search. Section 7 concludes. 

2 Previous Research 

2.1 Neural Audio Codec Investigation 

Previous research comparing NACs has tested neu-ral codecs on text-to-sound task (Ye et al., 2025), such as their ability to generate speech from texts using text-to-speech applying UTMOS as a metrics, a speech MOS (Mean Opinion Score) predictor (Saeki et al., 2022). They mostly investigate the in-terpretability of NAC at the decoding end, compar-ing the NAC outputs with human judgment. Other research focused on understanding how speech at-tributes like content, identity, and pitch are en-coded within these codecs by proposing a two-step analysis and synthesis approach (Sadok et al., 2025). Though focusing on SpeechTokenizer and BigCodec, (Sadok et al., 2025) partially discusses Mimi as one of four contemporary NACs studied for their ability to compress and decompress audio while maintaining a high level of quality. (Halimeh et al., 2025) investigates how the latent represen-tations learned by neural speech codecs relate to quality but also demonstrates that there is not a di-rect, interpretable relationship between quantized latents and the qualities of the raw speech signal, further supporting the case that neural speech codec representations are less interpretable than raw sig-nals. Lastly, (Mousavi et al., 2025) proposed a typology of codecs and an across-the-board bench-mark of codecs, extending the analysis of speech generation to audio and music generation. 

2.2 Mimi ABX experiment (Défossez et al., 2024) 

When releasing the Mimi codec, (Défossez et al., 2024) tested the potential phonetic representation of its semantic tokens using ABX discrimination tasks. The Phonetic Discriminability Evaluation, measured by the ABX error rate (Schatz et al., 2013), was used to characterize the phonetic dis-criminability of the semantic token’s representation space. This metric compares distances between embeddings of different instances of the same tri-phone (e.g., “big”) versus a minimally different contrastive triphone (e.g., “beg”) from the same speaker. A lower ABX error rate indicates better phonetic discriminability. We argue this procedure fails to capture what 80 ms of speech may repre-sent phonetically. The ABX assumes phonemic representation but with an 80 ms slice of speech, we could be below the phoneme level in an elon-gated vowel, and with many consonants, we are at the cluster level. We believe the time frame associ-ated to the Mimi tokens cannot be consistent with a phonemic representation, but is very likely to cap-ture complex co-articulation phenomena: mutual influences of neighbouring sounds that are well-established in the phonetics/phonology literature.  

> 2

The token interval may not correspond to the phone or word interval but still provide consistent representation (encoding) of acoustic and phonetic properties of the aligned material (phone, diphone, triphone at the phonetic level; allophone, cluster or syllables at the phonological level). 

3 Material and Methods 

3.1 Models 

We used part of the inference code made public by Kyutai and extracted the 8 codebooks with the Mimi model available from hugging face. 3 For this paper, we only investigated codebook_0, the code-book supposedly corresponding to the “semantic" tokens, specifically trained for this purpose (Défos-sez et al., 2024). As explained in (Défossez et al., 2024), during training, embeddings from WavLM (Chen et al., 2022) are distilled into a single vec-tor quantizer which produces semantic tokens and that is combined with separate acoustic tokens for reconstruction. In other words, the model builders claim that semantic information is more likely to be captured for this first codebook (codebook_0): the tokens of this codebook are learnt by distilla-tion from WavLM, a large-scale multi-lingual unla-belled audio dataset consisting of over 400k hours of audio in 23 languages collected from the Eu-ropean Parliament sessions, committee meetings, and other events. The audio tokens are running at 12.5Hz and with a bitrate of 1.1kbps. The semantic tokens are combined with separate acoustic tokens for reconstruction in the decoding phase. (Bal-lier et al., 2026) confirmed that these codebooks, (codebook_1) to (codebook_7) partially captured 

> 2Last, this moving windowed lens on the speech signal is very sensitive to phone alignment and the Phonetic Discrim-inability Evaluation dataset used for the evaluation does not seem to have been manually checked.
> 3https://huggingface.co/kyutai/mimi.

3prosodic features such as duration, pitch and glis-sando. 

3.2 Data 

We used the official training and test partitions of the TIMIT Acoustic-Phonetic Continuous Speech Corpus (Garofolo et al., 1993), a standard bench-mark for phonetic and speech recognition research. The TIMIT dataset contains of speech recordings from 630 speakers covering eight major American English dialect regions, with each speaker read-ing 10 phonetically-balanced sentences selected to maximize coverage of phonemes and phonetic contexts. 

Data splits. The corpus is divided into prede-fined training and test sets. The training set consists of 4,620 utterances from 462 speakers, while the test set includes 1,344 utterances from 168 speak-ers, ensuring balance across dialect regions and speaker demographics. 

Data structure. Each utterance is provided as a 16kHz, 16-bit linear PCM waveform file, accompa-nied by time-aligned transcriptions at the sentence, word, and phoneme levels. 

3.3 Method 

First, we encoded the audio files from the TIMIT training and testing data into Mimi codebooks 4.We then matched sequences of words and phones to their corresponding token encoding, focusing on the semantic tokens represented in codebook_0. Because each 80 ms interval of audio is encoded with a single token, the alignment between phones, words and token rarely coincides. Some words are spoken throughout multiple 80 ms intervals, while some tokens are encoding for multiple phones at a time. Table 1 shows an example of the time align-ment mismatch between phone, word and token (codebook) level. Because the tokens produced are time-dependent, token time stamps do not align with phonetic transciptions and the pronunciation of words. We consequently decided to report three levels of analysis for the Mimi semantic tokens: at phone level (interpreting the partial matching of token IDs with TIMIT phone set labels) at word level (interpreting the transcriptions of words in tokens) and at utterance level (trying to predict the 

> 4We used the HuggingFace implementation and the Kyutai github. These supplementary resources, as well as code for reproducibility (including realigned TextGrids and our code-books), will be publicly released via Github upon publication.

token start (in ms) end (in ms) phone word 888 640 720 epi|n|aw now 495 720 800 aw now 1586 800 880 aw|ix now/ adjourned 

> Table 1: Example of token to phone to word alignment

different regions of the TIMIT data based on the transcriptions of utterances into tokens). 

3.4 Metrics 

We analysed the relevance of the token sequences for transcriptions at phone level, word-level and utterance level. At the phone level, we could not use the more standard Phone Error Rate (PER) metric, which would compare a predicted phone sequence (from Mimi) to the gold standard TIMIT phonetic alignments. Instead, we replicated the method followed for the analysis of the SpeechTok-enizer codec (Zhang et al., 2024) and computed the equivalent of the Phone-Normalized Mutual Infor-mation (PNMI) (Hsu et al., 2021). In other words, we investigate how pure the correspondence be-tween TIMIT phone sequences and the time frames of the tokens. At the word-level, we used the train-ing set of the TIMIT data and computed the percent-age of words that were transcribed in the testing set with the same sequences of tokens as in the training data. At the utterance level, we used accuracy for the dialect classification task. 

4 Results 

4.1 Phone level 

We first report the correspondences we observed between the assumed time frames of the semantic tokens and the most frequent co-occurring TIMIT phone or sequences of phones observed. In the training set of the TIMIT Corpus, 1793 tokens IDs were identified out of the 2048 dictionary IDs of the codebook. The utilization rate of the Mimi semantic codebook (87.54%) is much more optimal than the one reported (Zhang et al., 2024) for the EnCodec NAC (Défossez et al., 2023). Table 2 summarises the main correspondences between the semantic token time frames and the TIMIT phones or phone sequences reported in the TIMIT corpus alignments. Assuming the correspondence is between seman-4(majority) TIMIT correspondence n

allophones/subphones 570 diphones 980 triphones 232 quadphones 11  

> Table 2: Distribution of TIMIT phone (sequences) matching Mimi semantic tokens

tic token IDs and possible sequences of TIMIT phones, we computed the equivalent of the Phone-Normalized Mutual Information (PNMI) (Hsu et al., 2021), which computes the purity of the matching between the majority vote and the other candidates observed in the “receptive field” of the tokens. We obtained a value of 0.66, which ranks much above HuBERT (0.43), EnCodec (0.28) and slightly below SpeechTokenizer (0.71) but still sim-ilarly suggests that the semantic distillation process is effective (Zhang et al., 2024). 

4.2 Word-to-Token Re-transcription Predictability 

At word-level, using the word timestamps of the TIMIT corpus, we examined all the token retran-scriptions of the words that were both present in the training set and in the testing set. For the 2,378 words present in the two sets, only 85 were tran-scribed differently in the testing set. Only 3.57 % of the token sequences corresponding to the tran-scriptions of words were not predicted. It is likely that dialectal features could explain the observed variation in token sequences. Many frequent words having allophonic variations, such as words hav-ing weak forms (eg a, her, would ), and the very linguistic token chosen to design the comparable subcorpus SA, “ greasy ” were found to have differ-ent token transcriptions in the training and testing sets. 

4.3 Utterance-Level Analysis 

Assuming that the sequences of semantic tokens can be used as allophonic transcriptions of TIMIT data, we used the utterances read by all the speakers and tried to predict the dialect region of the speaker on the basis of the clusters of token IDs found in the transcription of each sound file. Assuming the eighth region is more difficult to predict as it corresponds to mobile speakers, we carried out a seven-class classification task. We created a sparse matrix for the feature matrix that does not assume that all codebook_0 vectors have the same length                                                        

> DR1 DR2 DR3 DR4 DR5 DR6 DR7
> DR1 2000000DR2 817 12 43610 DR3 1712 54411 DR4 04613 804DR5 40116 16 02DR6 2110351DR7 211 825312
> Table 3: Confusion matrix of the Random Forest predic-tion of the TIMIT dialect region (Reference as columns, predictions as rows

(Table 3). Each row in the dataset may have a codebook_0 vector (token list) of a different length. The feature matrix is built by creating a sparse binary matrix where each unique token across the entire dataset becomes a column, and a value of “1” indicates that the token is present for a given sample. Sentences may have differing numbers of tokens, but the resulting matrix will always have the same number of columns (all unique tokens), with each row containing as many “1”s as the number of tokens present for that sample. The method is more computer-intensive but robust to variable-length codebook_0. We used a 80-20 split for a random forest model. The random forest model significantly outperformed the no-information rate, p < .001, with an accuracy of 32.63% (95% CI [26.69%, 39.01%]) and a Cohen’s κ = 0.20. 

4.4 Entropy-Based Token–Phoneme Analysis 

To refine the interpretation of these observations, we incorporated an entropy-based analysis of token– phoneme relationships using the TIMIT corpus. Importantly, TIMIT contains phonetically balanced sentences that are read by all speakers, including two shared utterances (SA1 and SA2). Although these sentences are not identical, they provide a controlled setting with consistent speaker coverage and comparable phonetic content. The results reveal a strong asymmetry between the conditional distributions P (phoneme | token )

and P (token | phoneme ). Specifically, tokens ex-hibit low entropy and are strongly associated with a dominant phoneme, whereas each phoneme corre-sponds to a broad distribution of competing tokens. To further investigate token stability, we com-pare token distributions for phonemes that occur in both SA1 and SA2. Despite being produced by the same set of speakers, we observe high Jensen– Shannon divergence between token distributions for many phonemes, often exceeding 0.8 (see fig-5Figure 2: Jensen–Shannon divergence between token distributions for shared sentences (SA1 vs SA2) across phonemes. High divergence values indicate substantial variation in token assignments across different phonetic contexts. 

ure 2). This indicates substantial variation in token assignments across different phonetic contexts. This many-to-one mapping provides quantitative support for the hypothesis that Mimi tokens encode finer-grained distinctions than phonemic categories. Rather than forming a discrete phoneme inventory, the first codebook partitions the acoustic space into clusters reflecting context-dependent realizations. This variability cannot be fully explained by phonemic distinctions alone. Even when consid-ering the same phoneme across comparable utter-ances, token distributions vary significantly, indi-cating sensitivity to contextual and coarticulatory factors. This result supports an allophonic inter-pretation of the tokens, where each phoneme is realized through multiple context-dependent vari-ants encoded as distinct tokens. 

5 Discussion 

5.1 Towards Subphonetic and Allophonic Representations 

The results suggest that Mimi’s semantic codebook does not encode phonemes as discrete symbolic units, but rather captures finer-grained acoustic-phonetic patterns. This observation is consistent with the idea of “bypassing transcription” (Bird, 2020), where linguistic structure is inferred directly from the speech signal without relying on prede-fined phonemic categories. A useful parallel can be drawn with subpho-netic modeling in traditional speech recognition. In Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-based systems (Rabiner, 2002), context-dependent states (often referred to as senones) are used to capture varia-tion in phoneme realizations across different con-texts. These units do not correspond directly to phonemes, but rather to clustered acoustic realiza-tions conditioned on phonetic environment (Hinton et al., 2012), (Wang et al., 2023). Similarly, the Mimi tokens appear to function as context-dependent acoustic units. The en-tropy asymmetry and the high divergence observed across contexts indicate that a single phoneme cor-responds to multiple token realizations, depending on coarticulation, prosody, and speaker-specific factors. It may suggest that the semantic code-book implicitly encodes a structured space of al-lophonic variation, and Mimi tokens can be inter-preted as forming an emergent inventory of sub-phonetic units, situated between continuous acous-tic representations and discrete phonological cate-gories. 

6 Potential Applications for Phonetic Modeling 

In this section, we compare the speech tokeniza-tion operated by Mimi to previous subphonetic modeling representations, especially for context-dependent subphonetic representations (Hwang and Huang, 1992). 

6.1 Revisiting Allophone Networks 

The “allophone network”(Cohen et al., 1987) rep-resented in Figure 3 for the word “ water ” shows the visualization of the main allophones expected for this word. A single phone [w] represents the initial consonant. The vowel opposes two possi-ble realizations or trajectories in the network, the “bob ” vowel or the “ bought ” vowel. The possibility of flapping is indicated for the medial consonant by DX and two possible allophones are noted for the final vowel, the central rhotic vowel as in bird 

or the reduced vowel with no rhoticity found in northern varieties (schwa). This networking of the allophone variants can be replicated with the word greasy using the TIMIT phoneset representa-tions or with the neural audio encoder tokens with many more details as evidenced in Figure 4. Six positions can be observed (compared to 9 in the token/subphonemic representation) for the TIMIT phone set representation of the pronunciations of “greasy ” in the training data. 6W AO AA DX TER AX   

> Figure 3: Allophone network for the word water (Cohen et al., 1987)

6.2 Speech Tokenizers as Metalinguistic Representations 

The behaviour of Mimi’s semantic codebook sug-gests parallels with earlier approaches to subpho-netic modeling in speech recognition. Rather than encoding discrete phoneme-like symbols, the to-kens appear to capture context-dependent acoustic-phonetic realizations shaped by coarticulation and phonetic environment. This interpretation is con-sistent with the entropy asymmetries and token-to-phone correspondences observed in our analyses. A useful comparison can be drawn with senones in Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-based ASR sys-tems (Hwang and Huang, 1992). Senones were introduced as context-dependent subphonetic units designed to model variation in phoneme realiza-tions across different acoustic environments. Simi-larly, Mimi tokens appear to function as distributed acoustic units that encode finer-grained variation than phoneme-level categories alone. 

6.3 Cross-Linguistic Evidence from VoxPopuli 

To extend the analysis beyond English, we exam-ined token distributions across language families using the VoxPopuli corpus (Wang et al., 2021a). Preliminary observations on Mimi representations across the 27 European Union languages suggest that token distributions tend to cluster according to language families, as illustrated in Table 4. This grouping indicates that the first codebook captures structured phonetic variation that is shared across related languages. 

Language Family Number 

Germanic 85 Romance 223 Slavic 187 Finno-Ugric 313 Baltic 368 Hellenic 520 Semitic 378 

> Table 4: Distribution of VoxPopuli languages by family.

These findings provide additional support for the allophonic hypothesis. If tokens were purely phone-mic, one would expect more language-specific and discrete mappings. Instead, the observed cluster-ing across language families suggests that tokens encode phonetic properties that generalize across languages, such as articulatory or acoustic similari-ties shaped by shared phonological systems. However, these results also highlight an impor-tant limitation: the relationship between phonetic units and Mimi tokens is not strictly one-to-one. Rather than forming a stable inventory of phoneme-like units, the codebook appears to implement a distributed representation in which phonetic enti-ties are mapped onto multiple context-dependent tokens. This observation is consistent with the entropy-based analysis, which shows that each phoneme corresponds to a broad set of competing tokens. 

6.4 Typologically Related Results 

Figure 5 summarizes three complementary metrics: Shannon entropy, token coverage, and maximum token probability, computed for each codebook across typologically related language groups. First, the entropy patterns are highly consistent across language families. All groups exhibit in-creasing entropy from codebook_0 to higher code-books, indicating progressively more uniform to-ken usage. Crucially, this trend is not language-specific but shared across different families, sug-gesting that the structure of the representation is largely language-independent. Second, the number of missing tokens decreases sharply across codebooks, reflecting improved coverage of the acoustic space. While code-book_0 shows substantial sparsity, higher code-books achieve near-complete coverage across all language families. This indicates that the represen-tational capacity of the codec is distributed across multiple codebooks rather than localized in a single layer. Third, the maximum token probability decreases across codebooks, showing that token distributions become less dominated by a small number of units. This again supports the idea of a more distributed and fine-grained encoding at deeper levels of the representation. Moreover, the fact that token distributions evolve similarly across codebooks for all language fam-ilies indicates that phonetic structure is not en-coded in isolation within codebook_0, but emerges 7Allophone Network for 'greasy' in the TIMIT testing set 

> gcl grix siy zih ux ey axr ix iy ih ux

(a) TIMIT phone set representation Allophone Network for 'greasy' in the TIMIT testing set (token representation)  

> 1385 1510 109 109 1719 475 1790 471 109 1719 1186 475 1790 761 705 1546 658

(b) Mimi token representation 

Figure 4: Comparison of the TIMIT phone transcriptions and Mimi semantic token representations of the allophone network for the pronunciations of the word greasy in the TIMIT training data 

Figure 5: Token distribution quality across language families and codebooks. Left: Shannon entropy (higher indicates more uniform distributions). Middle: number of missing tokens (lower indicates better coverage). Right: maximum token probability (lower indicates less dominance). 

from the interaction of multiple representational layers. This reinforces the view that Mimi imple-ments a distributed and context-sensitive encoding of speech, in which phonetic units are not mapped one-to-one onto discrete tokens but are instead rep-resented through combinations of tokens across codebooks. 

6.5 Token Distribution Across Codebooks and Language Families 

To further investigate the structure of the Mimi representations, we analyze the distribution of to-ken probabilities across codebooks and language families. Figure 6 presents the probability density of tokens for each codebook (CB0–CB7) and lan-guage family. A clear structural difference emerges across codebooks. The earliest codebooks (CB0–CB2) exhibit highly peaked distributions, where a small number of tokens dominate the representation. This indicates that these codebooks capture more selec-tive and possibly lower-level acoustic or phonetic features. In contrast, later codebooks (CB4–CB7) display flatter and more uniform distributions, sug-gesting a broader and less specialized use of tokens. 

6.6 Observations on Greek Phonetic Specificity 

Although phoneme-level alignment is not yet in-corporated, preliminary observations can be made regarding Greek, the sole representative of the Hel-lenic language family in the dataset. Greek is known for its relatively stable vowel system and distinct consonantal contrasts, including fricatives such as /x/ and / γ/, which are less common in many other European languages (Mennen and Okalidou, 2006). In the token distributions, the Hellenic group exhibits patterns broadly consistent with other lan-guage families, but with slight variations in peak structure and dispersion. These differences may reflect the influence of language-specific phonetic features, particularly in the realization of fricatives and vowel quality. 8Figure 6: Token probability density across codebooks (CB0–CB7) and language families. Each subplot shows the distribution over token indices, highlighting differences in sparsity and dominance across codebooks. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we compared the TIMIT phone align-ment with Mimi’s first codebook representing se-mantic tokens and measured the consistency of the mapping we produced. It remains to be seen whether the acoustic tokens (the 7 other parallel codebooks used to regenerate speech with the se-mantic codebook) could similarly be reconnected to properties of the speech signal such as supraseg-mental features. The growing number of down-stream tasks relying on this NAC makes it an object of research worthy of interest: the Mimi codec has been used with the Moshi conversational agent and Hibiki (Labiausse et al., 2025) for speech translation. It has more recently been adopted for Sesame’s Maya conversational speech model 5.An important limitation of our work is we did not fully investigate gender effect and potential duplicates of tokens, which could be attributed to different formant values for male and female voices. Traditional signal processing methods could be ap-plied to the latent space to extract meaningful fea-tures, such as energy, entropy, or frequency content, which might reveal important characteristics of the learned representations. We have not used some of 

> 5https://huggingface.co/sesame/csm-1b

the acoustic correlates of the codes. For instance, we could exploit mid-temporal value formant ex-tractions to assign the prototypical value of vowels to their corresponding token IDs. Finally, these results open a perspective that could be described as computational creolistics: the investigation of how speech representations emerge through the sharing and recombination of tokens across speakers and languages. Rather than forming fixed phonological categories, Mimi to-kens appear to function as indexical units, whose distribution reflects both shared acoustic structure and context-dependent variation, paving the way for a computational metalinguistic representation of allophonic classes. 

Acknowledgement 

We thank the three reviewers for their construc-tive feedback. This publication has emanated from research supported in part by a 2021 research equip-ment grant from the Scientific Platforms and Equip-ment Committee (PAPTAN project), under ANR Grant Number ANR-18-IDEX-0001 (Financement IdEx Université de Paris). 9References 

Nicolas Ballier, Artem Saloev, Erin Pacquetet, and Tay-lor Arnold. 2026. Is Prosody Encoded in the Neural Audio Codec Mimi? In Speech Prosody 2026 , pages 569–573. Steven Bird. 2020. Decolonising speech and language technology. In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on computational linguistics , pages 3504– 3519. Dani Byrd. 1992. Preliminary results on speaker-dependent variation in the timit database. The Jour-nal of the Acoustical Society of America , 92(1):593– 596. Dani Byrd. 1994. Relations of sex and dialect to reduc-tion. Speech communication , 15(1-2):39–54. Guoguo Chen, Shuzhou Chai, Guan-Bo Wang, Jiayu Du, Wei-Qiang Zhang, Chao Weng, Dan Su, Daniel Povey, Jan Trmal, Junbo Zhang, Mingjie Jin, Sanjeev Khudanpur, Shinji Watanabe, Shuaijiang Zhao, Wei Zou, Xiangang Li, Xuchen Yao, Yongqing Wang, Zhao You, and Zhiyong Yan. 2021. GigaSpeech: An Evolving, Multi-Domain ASR Corpus with 10,000 Hours of Transcribed Audio. In Interspeech 2021 ,pages 3670–3674. Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, and 1 oth-ers. 2022. Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing ,16(6):1505. Cynthia G Clopper and David B Pisoni. 2004a. Effects of talker variability on perceptual learning of dialects. 

Language and speech , 47(3):207–238. Cynthia G Clopper and David B Pisoni. 2004b. Some acoustic cues for the perceptual categorization of American English regional dialects. Journal of Pho-netics , 32(1):111–140. Michael Cohen, Gay Baldwin, Jared Bernstein, Hy Murveit, and Mitchel Weintraub. 1987. Stud-ies for an adaptive recognition lexicon. Proc. DARPA Speech Recognition Workshop, Report No. SAIC-87/1644 , pages 71–79. Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. 2023. High fidelity neural audio compres-sion. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 

Alexandre Défossez, Laurent Mazaré, Manu Orsini, Amélie Royer, Patrick Pérez, Hervé Jégou, Edouard Grave, and Neil Zeghidour. 2024. Moshi: a speech-text foundation model for real-time dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00037 .John S Garofolo, Lori F Lamel, William M Fisher, David S Pallett, Nancy L Dahlgren, Victor Zue, and Jonathan G Fiscus. 1993. Timit acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus. Linguistic data consor-tium .Mhd Modar Halimeh, Matteo Torcoli, Philipp Grundhu-ber, and Emanuël AP Habets. 2025. On the relation between speech quality and quantized latent represen-tations of neural codecs. ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, Andrew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N Sainath, and 1 others. 2012. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal processing magazine , 29(6):82–97. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-rahman Mohamed. 2021. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM transactions on audio, speech, and language processing , 29:3451–3460. Mei-Yuh Hwang and Xuedong Huang. 1992. Subpho-netic modeling for speech recognition. In Speech and Natural Language: Proceedings of a Workshop Held at Harriman, New York, February 23-26, 1992 .Val Jones-Sargent. 1985. Tyne bytes: a computerised sociolinguistic study of Tyneside . Peter Lang. Patricia Keating, B Blankenship, Dani Byrd, Edward Flemming, and Yuichi Todaka. 1992. Phonetic analy-ses of the TIMIT corpus of American English. Proc. ICSLP 1992 , pages 823–826. Patricia A Keating, Dani Byrd, Edward Flemming, and Yuichi Todaka. 1994. Phonetic analyses of word and segment variation using the TIMIT corpus of Amer-ican English. Speech Communication , 14(2):131– 142. Tom Labiausse, Laurent Mazaré, Edouard Grave, Alexandre Défossez, and Neil Zeghidour. 2025. High-fidelity simultaneous speech-to-speech transla-tion. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pages 32116–32129. PMLR. Ineke Mennen and Areti Okalidou. 2006. Acquisition of greek phonology: an overview. QMU Speech Science Research Centre Working Papers , (WP-11). David R Miller and James Trischitta. 1996. Statistical dialect classification based on mean phonetic features. 4:2025–2027. Pooneh Mousavi, Gallil Maimon, Adel Moumen, Dar-ius Petermann, Jiatong Shi, Haibin Wu, Haici Yang, Anastasia Kuznetsova, Artem Ploujnikov, Ricard Marxer, and 1 others. 2025. Discrete audio tokens: More than a survey! Transactions on Machine Learn-ing Research .Lawrence R Rabiner. 2002. A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 77(2):257– 286. 

10 Samir Sadok, Julien Hauret, and Éric Bavu. 2025. Bringing Interpretability to Neural Audio Codecs. In Interspeech 2025 , pages 5023–5027. Takaaki Saeki, Detai Xin, Wataru Nakata, Tomoki Koriyama, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. 2022. Utmos: Utokyo-sarulab system for voicemos challenge 2022. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communica-tion Association, Interspeech , 2022:4521–4525. Thomas Schatz, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Francis Bach, Aren Jansen, Hynek Hermansky, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2013. Evaluating speech features with the minimal-pair ABX task: analysis of the classical MFC/PLP pipeline. pages 1781–1785. Changhan Wang, Morgane Riviere, Ann Lee, Anne Wu, Chaitanya Talnikar, Daniel Haziza, Mary Williamson, Juan Pino, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2021a. Voxpop-uli: A large-scale multilingual speech corpus for rep-resentation learning, semi-supervised learning and interpretation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 993–1003. Changhan Wang, Morgane Riviere, Ann Lee, Anne Wu, Chaitanya Talnikar, Daniel Haziza, Mary Williamson, and Juan and Pino. 2021b. VoxPopuli: A large-scale multilingual speech corpus for representation learn-ing, semi-supervised learning and interpretation. Pro-ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 993– 1003. Liming Wang, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, and Chang Yoo. 2023. A theory of unsupervised speech recogni-tion. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1192–1215. Zhen Ye, Peiwen Sun, Jiahe Lei, Hongzhan Lin, Xu Tan, Zheqi Dai, Qiuqiang Kong, Jianyi Chen, Jiahao Pan, Qifeng Liu, and 1 others. 2025. Codec does matter: Exploring the semantic shortcoming of codec for audio language model. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 39(24):25697– 25705. Steve Young and Philip Woodland. 1994. State clus-tering in hidden markov model-based continuous speech recognition. Computer Speech & Language ,8(4):369–383. Xin Zhang, Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu. 2024. SpeechTokenizer: Unified Speech Tokenizer for Speech Large Language Models. The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .

11