Title: Attacking UTMOS: Probing the Robustness of a Speech Quality Assessment Model

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.31105v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:29:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Attacking UTMOS: Probing the Robustness of a Speech Quality Assessment Model 

Wen-Chin Huang, Tomoki Toda 

Nagoya University, Japan 

Abstract —UTMOS has become one of the most commonly used deep neural network-based speech quality assessment (SQA) metrics in speech processing research. In this paper, we attack UTMOS to probe its robustness. Starting from high-quality speech samples, we optimize the input in two directions: ascore-preserving attack, which degrades perceived quality while maintaining the predicted score, and a quality-preserving attack, which lowers the predicted score while maintaining perceived quality. We consider three input spaces: raw waveform, mel spectrogram with a HiFi-GAN vocoder, and the latent space of EnCodec, a neural audio codec. Experimental results show that score-preserving attacks are effective against UTMOS. Although perfect quality-preserving attacks are more difficult, optimization in the EnCodec latent space provides the best chance of success. These results reveal failure modes of UTMOS and highlight the importance of robustness analysis for DNN-based SQA metrics. 

Index Terms —speech quality assessment, UTMOS, robustness, adversarial example, adversarial attack 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Speech quality assessment (SQA) refers to the evaluation of speech quality [1], [2]. In this work, we are particularly interested in non-intrusive, deep neural network (DNN)-based methods trained with ⟨speech , quality label ⟩ pairs, where the quality labels are collected through mean opinion score (MOS)-style listening tests [3]–[6] 1. One of the most popular SQA models is UTMOS [7], the winning system of the VoiceMOS Challenge 2022 [8]. Trained on the BVCC dataset [9], which contains synthetic speech samples from 187 text-to-speech (TTS) and voice conversion (VC) systems, UTMOS was shown to have a system-level Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient larger than 0.9 with human ratings [8]. The strong performance of DNN-based SQA models has led to their wide adoption in speech research. Their use can be broadly categorized into two directions. The first is to use them as evaluation metrics. While this use is most direct in speech synthesis research [10], these models have also been adopted in other speech processing tasks, including speech enhancement [11], neural audio coding [12], and spoken dialogue systems [13]. The second, more recent direction is to use SQA models to guide the training of speech generation models, by using them as loss functions for TTS [14] or reward functions to perform preference alignment [15], or as training objectives for other speech generation tasks, such as speech enhancement [16]. 

> 1

In the remainder of the paper, unless specified, the term “SQA model” refers to this type of method. 

Fig. 1: Illustration of the desired behavior zone of an ideal speech quality aseessment model (grey arrow), and the pro-posed score-preserving attack (orange arrow) and the quality-preserving attack (green arrow) directions. The increasing use of SQA models has raised the need to carefully examine their robustness. Due to their data-driven nature, models such as UTMOS can suffer from robustness issues, with out-of-domain (OOD) generalization being one of the most widely studied aspects. Previous studies have repeatedly shown that SQA models can generalize poorly to speech samples from different domains, such as noisy speech or singing voices; different languages, such as Chinese or French; newer and higher-quality speech synthesis systems; or even different listening-test settings [17], [18]. In particular, such domain shifts can reduce their ability to correctly rank the performance of speech synthesis systems. These findings have led researchers to call for more careful use of SQA models to evaluate speech generation systems [19]. The line of research discussed above mainly identifies natu-rally occurring examples that expose robustness issues in SQA models. In this work, we take a complementary approach: we actively engineer samples to attack SQA models, focusing specifically on UTMOS, and construct examples that challenge the model by design . This idea is closely related to adversarial examples generated through input optimization [20]. Fig. 1 illustrates the basic concept. An ideal SQA model should follow the gray arrow: speech with low perceived quality should receive a low predicted quality score, and vice versa. Based on this perspective, we propose two attacks against UTMOS. Starting from a high-quality speech sample, the first attack minimizes the perceived quality while maintaining the predicted quality score. We refer to this as a score-preserving 

> arXiv:2606.31105v1 [cs.SD] 30 Jun 2026

attack . The second attack minimizes the predicted quality score while preserving perceived quality, which we refer to as a quality-preserving attack . Neither attack should succeed against an ideal and robust SQA model. In the experiments, we instantiate the proposed attacks in three optimization spaces: the waveform space, the la-tent space of a neural audio codec, EnCodec [21], and the mel-spectrogram space coupled with a neural vocoder, HiFi-GAN [22]. The results show that UTMOS is vulnerable to score-preserving attacks, whereas quality-preserving attacks are substantially more difficult, with the EnCodec latent space providing the most promising results. These findings suggest that the robustness issues of DNN-based SQA models are not limited to naturally occurring OOD samples, but can also be exposed through adversarially constructed examples. Audio samples are available online 2.II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. White-box gradient-based adversarial attacks 

The phenomenon of adversarial vulnerability was first dis-covered in [20], where it was demonstrated that applying imperceptible perturbations to inputs could cause DNNs to fail. Early works heavily favored constrained attacks , which treat the perturbation magnitude as a strict, hard boundary while maximizing the model loss [23]–[27]. These methods forcibly clip the perturbation back into a predefined boundary at every optimization step. Later, it was found that penalized attacks could achieve higher success rates and tighter dis-tortion bounds. The representative work is the C&W attack [28], which minimizes the perturbation while incorporating the adversarial objective as a soft loss penalty. These two goals are dynamically balanced via a weighting hyperparameter. These works laid the foundations and mathematical groundwork for manipulating continuous signals (mostly image pixels), and researchers then adapted these concepts for various speech applications. 

B. Adversarial attacks in speech processing 

While speech processing has seen various forms of attacks, including attacks constructed to be perceivable by voice inter-faces but inaudible to humans [29]–[31] and spoofing attacks against automatic speaker verification systems [32], [33], the line of work most closely related to this paper is model-level adversarial examples. In these attacks, the input speech is optimized to change the prediction of a target speech model. Early studies generated targeted adversarial examples that forced automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems to output desired transcriptions, with later work improving perceptual imperceptibility or robustness to physical playback [34]–[36]. Similar optimization-based frameworks have also been applied to speaker verification and recognition systems [37], [38]. Attacks on speech quality assessment models differ from those on many other speech processing models and are non-trivial in an important way. Attacks on speech or speaker 

> 2https://unilight.github.io/attack-utmos-demo/

recognition models add small acoustic perturbations to change model predictions while, ideally, leaving high-level attributes such as phonetic content or speaker identity unchanged. In contrast, speech quality itself is not independent of low-level acoustic properties . It can be affected by a broad spectrum of aspects: background noise, reverberation, intelligibility, and prosody. Therefore, directly perturbing the waveform can easily change the perceived quality, making the design of attacks on SQA models more difficult. This motivates us to consider not only waveform-space optimization, but also alternative attack spaces that may better control the trade-off between predicted quality and perceived quality. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Formulation 

Our attack starts with a high-quality speech sample x0 ∈ X 

where X denotes the space of all possible speech waveforms 3.We denote the perceived quality (e.g., naturalness score from a five-point scale MOS test) of a speech waveform as f :

X → [1 , 5] . Similarly, we denote the predicted quality score 

yielded by a SQA model as g : X → [1 , 5] . Since x0 is a clean, natural sample, we assume f (x0) = g(x0) = 5 . In this work, we specifically choose to attack the UTMOS model [7], which takes a speech waveform as input and outputs a score ranging from one to five. We take inspiration from [28] and formulate the problem of attacking the SQA model as an untargeted optimization problem that can be solved iteratively. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we consider the following two types of attack directions:  

> •

A score-preserving attack aims to find an example ˜x

the degrades the actual, perceived quality as much as possible while preserving the predicted quality score. In our setting, this attack tries to find a speech sample 

˜xsp that maximizes the differenced between f ( ˜ xsp ) and 

f (x0) while minimizing the difference between g( ˜ xsp )

and g(x0). Formally, 

˜xsp = arg min 

> x

− f (x) − f (x0) + λsp 

 g(x) − g(x0).

(1) Here, the first term tries to maximize the perceived quality degradation, and the second term tried to preserve the predicted score. The second term could be seen as a 

penalty [28], and λsp serves as a hyperparameter that controls the strength of such a penalty.  

> •

A quality-preserving attack aims to find an example 

˜x the decreases the predicted quality score as much as possible while preserving the actual perceived quality. In other words, this attack tries to find a speech sample 

˜xqp that maximizes the differenced between g( ˜ xqp ) and 

> 3We chose to start from high-quality speech purely for simplicity. A low-quality speech sample may have multiple realizations, including background noise, transmission error, or artifacts from a TTS system. Investigating attacks that start with low-quality samples can thus be complicated, and we leave it for future work.

Fig. 2: Illustration of the three attack spaces in this work. 

g(x0) while minimizing the difference between f ( ˜ xqp )

and f (x0). Formally, 

˜xqp = arg min 

> x

− g(x) − g(x0) + λqp 

 f (x) − f (x0).

(2) Similar to above, λqp is applied to the penalty term, the quality-preserving criterion. The hyperparameters λsp , λ qp are expected to control the trade-off between the attack effectiveness and the penalty. Taking the score-preserving attack as an example, if λsp is set too large, the optimization will not progress because the penalty term prioritizes preserving the predicted quality score too heavily. On the other hand, if λsp is set too small, the penalty term will have no effect, and the optimization may simply degrade the perceived quality indefinitely without preserving the predicted quality. We examine this trade-off in Sec. IV In both attack directions, we need to be able to calculate 

f (x)−f (x0) during every optimization iteration, but it would be impractical to ask human to make the judgement in every single iteration. Following the early adversarial examples literature, in practice we adopt the L2 norm in the input space to define a distance measure d(·, ·) such that 

f (x) − f (x0) = d(x, x0) = ∥x − x0∥2 . (3) 

B. Attack space 

In the adversarial examples literature where image is fre-quently used as a representative object, optimization typically works on the pixel space, and it was believed (and empirically shown) that two images with a sufficiently small L2 distance in the pixel space are perceptually identical. The most naive analogy would be to perform optimization in the waveform space. However, in speech processing, raw waveform is rarely the operation unit. As shown in Fig. 2, in this work, we experiment with three input spaces to perform attack on, as explained below. 

1) Waveform: As explained above, the most straightfor-ward idea is to simply input the speech waveform to the UTMOS model, and calculate the gradient with respect to the optimization objectives in either Eq. 1 or Eq. 2 to perform input optimization on the speech waveform space. In the remainder of this paper, we denote this space as waveform .The problem with operating on the waveform is that because we are interested in the quality of the speech sample, even a small L2 distance induced by a negligible noise on the waveform space can cause a strong quality difference. 

2) Mel spectrogram with HiFi-GAN: Our next choice is to operate on the space of mel spectrogram, which is a commonly used time-frequency representation that is easier to work on because of the lower temporal resolution and clearer acoustic structure. Since UTMOS takes waveform as input, we need to convert from mel spectrogram to waveform. In this work, we adopt the HiFi-GAN model [22]. In the remainder of this paper, we denote this space as mel-spec + HiFi-GAN . During each optimization iteration, the HiFi-GAN model converts the mel spectrogram to waveform, which is further input to the UTMOS model to obtain the predicted quality score, and the gradient is finally propagated back to update the mel spectrogram. Similar to waveform, a small L2 distance on the mel spectrogram domain may still cause a perceptible quality difference, because phase is not considered. However, the adoption of the HiFi-GAN model brings an unexpected effect: because models like HiFi-GAN are typically trained on clean speech, theoretically it should induce a smooth speech mani-fold on the input space: even if we make wild modifications to the mel spectrogram, it is possible that HiFi-GAN always maps it to clean speech. 

3) EnCodec latent space: Our final choice is to operate in the latent space of a neural audio codec, EnCodec [21]. In the remainder of this paper, we denote this space as 

EnCodec latent . EnCodec is an encoder–decoder model with a quantized latent representation, trained end-to-end on a wide variety of audio data. During each optimization step, the EnCodec decoder maps the latent codes back to a waveform, which is then passed to UTMOS to compute the predicted quality score. The gradient is then backpropagated through the decoder to update the latent representation. Compared with mel-spec + HiFi-GAN , the EnCodec latent space has a larger degree of freedom because it does not need to follow the structure of the mel spectro-gram.. In addition, because EnCodec is trained not only on clean speech but also on noisy speech, music, and general audio, it is expected to impose a weaker speech manifold than mel-spec + HiFi-GAN while still providing a more structured optimization space than the raw waveform. 

Why mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and EnCodec latent ? We choose these two spaces not only because they are equipped with decoders that induce speech-related manifolds, but also because they are widely used in modern TTS systems: HiFi-GAN is commonly used as the vocoder in two-stage, mel-spectrogram-based TTS systems [39], [40], whereas EnCodec is a key component of large language model-based TTS systems [41], [42]. Demonstrating the vulnerability of UTMOS in optimization spaces associated with these models is therefore practically relevant. IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

A. Experimental settings 

We utilized the test-clean subset of the LibriSpeech corpus [43]. We first randomly selected 30 distinct speakers. Then, for each speaker, we randomly sampled one speech utterance that met two criteria: (1) audio duration between three and five seconds, and (2) UTMOS score between four and five. All speech samples are in 16 kHz. We used a wrapper of the official UTMOS model check-point 4, and we used the official EnCodec model checkpoint on HuggingFace 5. In addition, we used an open-source HiFi-GAN model checkpoint 6, which was trained on the LibriTTS corpus [44]. All runs were optimized with Adam [45] for 50 iterations. The learning rate was set to be 1 × 10 −2 for waveform 

and 5 × 10 −2 for mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and EnCodec latent . The magnitude of ϵ was set to be 1 × 10 −4. In practice, in the beginning of the optimization process, ˜x is initialized as x0. As a reuslt, the optimization objectives and thus the generated gradient in Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 will be zero. To avoid this, we modify the penality terms by adding a small 

ϵ offset to the target score or the input-domain penalty. This does not define a new attack goal; it only avoids degenerate zero-gradient behavior at the first optimization step. Perceived quality can ultimately only be evaluated by human listeners. However, it is impractical to conduct listening tests for every attack configuration and optimization run. We there-fore use PESQ [46] as a proxy metric for perceived quality in the experiments. We avoid using another DNN-based SQA model, such as NISQA or DNSMOS, as the reference metric, since such models may themselves exhibit adversarial fragility. Importantly, PESQ is not treated as a substitute for human perception, but only as an objective proxy for screening and visualization . For the remainder of this section, we will be using PESQ-UTMOS plots for analysis. Representative samples identified from the PESQ-based analysis are later validated through a listening test. 

B. Random noise pertubation baseline results 

One way to view the attacks is that we add perturbations to the input in a specific way to reach a certain goal. It therefore raises a fundamental question: how do the perceived and predicted quality change if we add random noise to the input? This should be viewed as the “baseline”. To this end, we add Gaussian noises with different amplitude values to the three attack spaces. Figure 3 shows the results. It could be observed that as the noise amplitude increased, both PESQ and UTMOS scores dropped, which was in fact the desired behavior as depicted in Fig. 1. On the other hand, this result justifies our proposed attacks, as we aim to find samples that minimizes the perceived quality while preserving the predicted quality score, and vice versa. 

C. Score-preserving attack results 1) Results from different attack spaces: We now start with our first attack direction, the score-preserving attack. Fig. 4 shows the results from different attack spaces and λsp values, which represents the stength of the score preservation penalty 

> 4https://github.com/tarepan/SpeechMOS
> 5https://huggingface.co/facebook/encodec 24khz
> 6https://huggingface.co/speechbrain/tts-hifigan-libritts-16kHz

Fig. 3: Random noise pertubation results. Random noise vectors with different amplitude were added to the three attack spaces, and the PESQ and UTMOS scores are calculated and plotted. 

Fig. 4: Score-preserving attack results. in Eq. 1. All three attack spaces produced samples located near the desired score-preserving region, i.e., low PESQ relative to the original sample, while maintaining a UTMOS score close to the attack target. This indicates that UTMOS can be insensitive to substantial signal degradation. Looking at individual spaces, for waveform and EnCodec latent ,all λsp values gave similar PESQ and UTMOS results. On the other hand, we observed different outcomes with different 

λsp values in the mel-spec + HiFi-GAN space: as λsp 

decreases (i.e., the score-preservation penalty weakens) and PESQ score drops, the final UTMOS score decreases as well. 

2) Dynamics in a single optimization run: We further plot the optimization dynamics inside a single score-preserving attack run in Fig. 5. First, Fig. 5a compares the dynamics with different λsp values in the mel-spec + HiFi-GAN 

space. With a properly large λsp , the score-preserving penalty was strong enough to “support” the optimization to reach the desired score-preserving region. In constrast, a small 

λsp makes the optimization degenerate to pure PESQ mini-mization, leading to a behavior similar to that described in Sec. IV-B. Figure 5b compares the dynamics of all three attack spaces (a) Optimization dynamics for the mel-spec + HiFi-GAN space across different lambda weights.             

> (b) Optimization dynamics across the waveform ,mel-spec +HiFi-GAN ,and EnCodec latent spaces at afixed lambda weight of 1.

Fig. 5: Optimization dynamics in a single optimization run in score-preserving attack. One single, identical LibriSpeech sample is used across the experiments. with λsp = 1. For the mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and 

EnCodec latent spaces, we observe a “smooth” horizon-tal movement, showing a gradual decrease in PESQ while maintaining the UTMOS score. What was interesting was the dynamics of the waveform space: at the very first step, the sample became severely “contaminated”, reaching extremely low UTMOS and PESQ scores. Upon manual inspection, the audio sample at this point contained strong white noise. However, the optimization was able to “micro-adjust” the noise and “climb” up to the desired low-PESQ, high-UTMOS region. Because HiFi-GAN and EnCodec were trained to generate speech, their output spaces are implicitly biased toward a speech-like manifold. Perturbations in these spaces thus tend to change the signal through speech-structured distortions rather than arbitrary sample-level noise, making it easier to gradually reduce PESQ while keeping UTMOS stable. In contrast, optimization in the waveform space is unconstrained and can immediately “leave” the speech manifold, producing severe 

Fig. 6: Quality-preserving attack results. contamination before the optimizer finds a noisy region with high UTMOS score. This interpretation is only a hypothesis; experimentally examining this mechanism is beyond the scope of this work. 

D. Quality-preserving attack results 1) Results from different attack spaces: We next turn to the second attack direction, the quality-preserving attack. Fig. 6 shows the results obtained from different attack spaces and different values of λqp , which controls the strength of the quality-preservation penalty in Eq. 2. In contrast to the score-preserving attack results in Sec. IV-C, where samples approached the target region, generating samples close to the desired quality-preserving region was substantially more difficult. To quantify the degree of attack success, we examine ∆qp =

PESQ − UTMOS. An ideal attack would achieve ∆qp = 3 .5

with PESQ = 4 .5 and UTMOS = 1 .0, and a larger value indicates a more successful attack. The most successful setting for each attack space is summarized as follows:  

> •

waveform : λqp = 1 × 10 6, (PESQ, UTMOS) =(2 .20 , 1.48) , and ∆qp = 0 .72 . 

> •

mel-spec + HiFi-GAN : λqp = 1 × 10 4,(PESQ, UTMOS) = (2 .26 , 1.33) , and ∆qp = 0 .93 . 

> •

EnCodec latent : λqp = 1 ×10 5, (PESQ, UTMOS) =(3 .12 , 1.32) , and ∆qp = 1 .80 .These results indicate that optimization in the EnCodec latent latent space provides the most promising results among the three attack spaces. However, manual inspection showed that even the best attacked samples in each space were perceptually different from the original samples, suggesting that fully quality-preserving attacks remain difficult. 

2) Dynamics in a single optimization run: Figure 7 shows the optimization dynamics inside a single quality-preserving attack run across the three spaces. First, looking at the 

waveform results in Fig. 7a, we observed a phenomenon similar to that in Fig. 5b: the sample reached extremely low UTMOS and PESQ scores at the very first step, regardless (a) waveform (b) mel-spec + HiFi-GAN (c) EnCodec latent 

Fig. 7: Effect of the quality-preserving penalty weight λqp on optimization dynamics within each attack space. Each panel fixes the attack space and compares trajectories produced by different values of λqp for the same utterance. Larger λqp changes the trade-off between reducing predicted quality and preserving perceptual similarity, resulting in distinct paths in the PESQ– UTMOS plane. TABLE I: UTMOS, PESQ and perceived quality (with 95% confidence interval) results obtained from the MOS test for the quality-preserving attack.                                                                    

> System Parameter UTMOS PESQ Perceived quality Original –4.30 4.50 4.46 ±0.12 Random noise amp = 0 .01 2.51 1.32 2.01 ±0.17
> waveform λqp = 1 ×10 73.12 3.58 3.61 ±0.12
> λqp = 1 ×10 61.50 2.35 2.69 ±0.12
> mel-spec +HiFi-GAN
> λqp = 1 ×10 52.16 2.34 2.24 ±0.14
> λqp = 1 ×10 41.35 2.19 1.96 ±0.13
> EnCodec latent
> λqp = 1 ×10 62.01 3.41 3.50 ±0.16
> λqp = 1 ×10 51.36 3.21 3.11 ±0.14

of the λqp value. Then, if the λqp value (i.e., the quality-preserving penalty) is too small, the optimization lacks the necessary gradient strength to recover. However, even when the λqp value is large—and the optimization mechanics suc-cessfully drive the coordinate toward the correct direction by increasing the perceived quality (PESQ) – the UTMOS score inevitably increases as well. Looking at Figs. 7b and 7c, the 

mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and EnCodec latent spaces demonstrated a more similar behavior, where the λqp value controls the magnitude of the suppressed quality drop. 

E. Listening test results 

For the listening test, from the results in Sec. IV-C, we found that score-preserving samples exhibited severe degradation un-der PESQ and manual inspection. Thus, we focus the listening test on the more ambiguous quality-preserving setting. We conducted a five-point scale MOS test to assess the perceived quality of ten randomly picked samples from each of the following systems: the original sample, the random noise per-turbation baseline, and quality-preseving attacked waveform ,

mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and EnCodec latent , each with two different λqp values. The detailed setting can be found in Tab. I. We recuited fourteen participants, where every single participant listened to each of the 80 samples. Table I shows the results. We found that the perceived quality scores had a consistent trend with PESQ, with both sample-level and system-level linear correlation coefficients at 0.90 and 0.96, respectively. This result justifies the usage of PESQ as a proxy perceived quality metric. We also confirmed, via two-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, that the attacked samples are statistically different from the original samples with p-values all smaller than 1 × 10 −14 , suggesting that fully quality-preserving attacks were not achievable against UTMOS. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we investigated the robustness of UTMOS, a widely used DNN-based speech quality assessment model, through input optimization on three spaces: waveform ,

mel-spec + HiFi-GAN and EnCodec latent . Exper-imental results showed that UTMOS is clearly vulnerable to score-preserving attacks: severely degraded samples can still receive high predicted quality scores. In contrast, quality-preserving attacks were substantially more difficult, and the listening test confirmed that the attacked samples remained perceptually different from the original samples. Among the three attack spaces, optimization in the EnCodec latent 

space provided the most promising results for the quality-preserving direction. These results suggest that UTMOS may be particularly unreliable when used as an optimization target or reward, because high predicted scores can be maintained even under severe perceptual degradation. This does not inval-idate its use as a passive evaluation metric, but it indicates that UTMOS scores should be interpreted with caution, especially in settings where systems are directly or indirectly optimized against the metric. More broadly, our findings suggest that robustness issues in DNN-based SQA models are not limited to naturally occurring out-of-domain samples, but can also be exposed through adversarially constructed examples. As future work, we are first interested in extending the analysis beyond UTMOS. In particular, we plan to examine models trained on noisy and enhanced speech [4], [5], as well as models trained on broader collections of speech quality data [18], [47]. We are also interested in attacks that start from low-quality examples. Such attacks can be interpreted as a form of “speech enhancement” guided by SQA models, where the goal is to improve the predicted quality score through input optimization. Finally, we are interested in attacking non-score-based SQA models. For example, there is an increasing trend toward evaluating spoken dialogue systems using SQA models that output natural language descriptions, many of which are based on LLMs [48]–[50]. This is in spirit similar to works on attacking LLM-as-a-judge [51], and we plan to explore methods such as prompt injection attacks [52]. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 25K00143, Japan. We would like to thank Dr. Erica Cooper from NICT, Japan and Mr. Atsushi Miyashita from Nagoya University, Japan for the fruitful discussion. The au-thors used ChatGPT 5.5 and Codex to (1) help generate source codes for the experiments (2) polish the English grammar and word usage of the manuscript. The idea is original, and authors take full responsibility for the contents in the manuscript. REFERENCES [1] S. M¨ oller, W.-Y. Chan, N. Cˆ ot´ e, T. H. Falk, A. Raake, and M. W¨ altermann, “Speech Quality Estimation: Models and Trends,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 18–28, 2011. [2] E. Cooper, W.-C. Huang, Y. Tsao, H.-M. Wang, T. Toda, and J. Ya-magishi, “A review on subjective and objective evaluation of synthetic speech,” Acoustical Science and Technology , vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 161–183, 2024. [3] C.-C. Lo, S.-W. Fu, W.-C. Huang, X. Wang, J. Yamagishi, Y. Tsao, and H.-M. Wang, “MOSNet: Deep Learning-Based Objective Assessment for Voice Conversion,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2019, pp. 1541–1545. [4] G. Mittag, B. Naderi, A. Chehadi, and S. M¨ oller, “NISQA: A Deep CNN-Self-Attention Model for Multidimensional Speech Quality Pre-diction with Crowdsourced Datasets,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2021, pp. 2127–2131. [5] C. K. Reddy, V. Gopal, and R. Cutler, “DNSMOS: A non-intrusive perceptual objective speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2021, pp. 6493–6497. [6] E. Cooper, W.-C. Huang, T. Toda, and J. Yamagishi, “Generalization ability of MOS prediction networks,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2022, pp. 8442– 8446. [7] T. Saeki, D. Xin, W. Nakata, T. Koriyama, S. Takamichi, and H. Saruwatari, “UTMOS: UTokyo-SaruLab System for VoiceMOS Chal-lenge 2022,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2022, pp. 4521–4525. [8] W.-C. Huang, E. Cooper, Y. Tsao, H.-M. Wang, T. Toda, and J. Yamag-ishi, “The VoiceMOS Challenge 2022,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2022, pp. 4536–4540. [9] E. Cooper and J. Yamagishi, “How do voices from past speech synthesis challenges compare today?” in Proc. 11th ISCA Speech Synthesis Workshop (SSW 11) , 2021, pp. 183–188. [10] Z. Ju, Y. Wang, K. Shen, X. Tan, D. Xin, D. Yang, E. Liu, Y. Leng, K. Song, S. Tang, Z. Wu, T. Qin, X. Li, W. Ye, S. Zhang, J. Bian, L. He, J. Li, and S. Zhao, “NaturalSpeech 3: Zero-shot speech synthesis with factorized codec and diffusion models,” in Proc. ICML , 21–27 Jul 2024, pp. 22 605–22 623. [11] S. Abdulatif, R. Cao, and B. Yang, “CMGAN: Conformer-Based Metric-GAN for Monaural Speech Enhancement,” IEEE/ACM TASLP , vol. 32, pp. 2477–2493, 2024. [12] S. Ji, Z. Jiang, W. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Fang, J. Zuo, Q. Yang, X. Cheng, Z. Wang, R. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Yang, R. Huang, Y. Jiang, Q. Chen, S. Zheng, and Z. Zhao, “WavTokenizer: an Efficient Acoustic Discrete Codec Tokenizer for Audio Language Modeling,” in ICLR , 2025. [13] Q. Fang, S. Guo, Y. Zhou, Z. Ma, S. Zhang, and Y. Feng, “LLaMA-Omni: Seamless Speech Interaction with Large Language Models,” in 

Proc. ICLR , Y. Yue, A. Garg, N. Peng, F. Sha, and R. Yu, Eds., 2025, pp. 57 607–57 624. [14] Y. Choi, Y. Jung, Y. Suh, and H. Kim, “Learning to Maximize Speech Quality Directly Using MOS Prediction for Neural Text-to-Speech,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 52 621–52 629, 2022. [15] J. Tian, C. Zhang, J. Shi, H. Zhang, J. Yu, S. Watanabe, and D. Yu, “Preference Alignment Improves Language Model-Based TTS,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2025, pp. 1–5. [16] W. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Li, J. Shi, S. Watanabe, and Y. Qian, “Improv-ing Speech Enhancement with Multi-Metric Supervision from Learned Quality Assessment,” in Proc. ASRU , 2025, pp. 1–8. [17] E. Cooper, W.-C. Huang, Y. Tsao, H.-M. Wang, T. Toda, and J. Yam-agishi, “The VoiceMOS Challenge 2023: Zero-Shot Subjective Speech Quality Prediction for Multiple Domains,” in Proc. ASRU , 2023, pp. 1–7. [18] W.-C. Huang, E. Cooper, and T. Toda, “MOS-Bench: Benchmarking Generalization Abilities of Subjective Speech Quality Assessment Mod-els,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing ,vol. 34, pp. 2385–2397, 2026. [19] E. Cooper, S. L. Maguer, E. Klabbers, and J. Yamagishi, “Good Practices for Evaluation of Synthesized Speech,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03250 , 2025. [20] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. J. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks,” in Proc. ICLR , 2014. [21] A. D´ efossez, J. Copet, G. Synnaeve, and Y. Adi, “High fidelity neural audio compression,” TMLR , 2023. [22] J. Kong, J. Kim, and J. Bae, “HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Efficient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis,” in Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 17 022–17 033. [23] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples,” in Proc. ICLR , 2015. [24] A. Kurakin, I. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial Examples in the Physical World,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533 , 2016. [25] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “DeepFool: A Simple and Accurate Method to Fool Deep Neural Networks,” in Proc. CVPR , June 2016. [26] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and A. Swami, “The Limitations of Deep Learning in Adversarial Set-tings,” in Proc. IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) , 2016, pp. 372–387. [27] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks,” in Proc. ICLR ,2018. [28] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards Evaluating the Robustness of Neural Networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2017, pp. 39–57. [29] N. Carlini, P. Mishra, T. Vaidya, Y. Zhang, M. Sherr, C. Shields, D. Wagner, and W. Zhou, “Hidden Voice Commands,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security) , Austin, TX, Aug. 2016, pp. 513–530. [30] G. Zhang, C. Yan, X. Ji, T. Zhang, T. Zhang, and W. Xu, “DolphinAt-tack: Inaudible Voice Commands,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2017, p. 103–117. [31] H. Abdullah, W. Garcia, C. Peeters, P. Traynor, K. R. Butler, and J. Wilson, “Practical Hidden Voice Attacks against Speech and Speaker Recognition Systems,” in Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium , 2019. [32] M. Todisco, X. Wang, V. Vestman, M. Sahidullah, H. Delgado, A. Nautsch, J. Yamagishi, N. Evans, T. H. Kinnunen, and K. A. Lee, “ASVspoof 2019: Future Horizons in Spoofed and Fake Audio Detection,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2019, pp. 1008–1012. [33] X. Wang, J. Yamagishi, M. Todisco, H. Delgado, A. Nautsch, N. Evans, M. Sahidullah, V. Vestman, T. Kinnunen, K. A. Lee, L. Juvela, P. Alku, Y.-H. Peng, H.-T. Hwang, Y. Tsao, H.-M. Wang, S. L. Maguer, M. Becker, F. Henderson, R. Clark, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, Y. Jia, K. Onuma, K. Mushika, T. Kaneda, Y. Jiang, L.-J. Liu, Y.-C. Wu, W.-C. Huang, T. Toda, K. Tanaka, H. Kameoka, I. Steiner, D. Matrouf, J.-F. Bonastre, A. Govender, S. Ronanki, J.-X. Zhang, and Z.-H. Ling, “ASVspoof 2019: A large-scale public database of synthesized, con-verted and replayed speech,” Computer Speech & Language , vol. 64, p. 101114, 2020. [34] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Audio adversarial examples: Targeted attacks on speech-to-text,” in Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW) , 2018, pp. 1–7. [35] Y. Qin, N. Carlini, G. Cottrell, I. Goodfellow, and C. Raffel, “Impercep-tible, Robust, and Targeted Adversarial Examples for Automatic Speech Recognition,” in Proc. ICML , 09–15 Jun 2019, pp. 5231–5240. [36] H. Yakura and J. Sakuma, “Robust audio adversarial example for a physical attack,” in Proc. IJCAI , 7 2019, pp. 5334–5341. [37] F. Kreuk, Y. Adi, M. Cisse, and J. Keshet, “Fooling End-To-End Speaker Verification With Adversarial Examples,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2018, pp. 1962–1966. [38] G. Chen, S. Chenb, L. Fan, X. Du, Z. Zhao, F. Song, and Y. Liu, “Who is Real Bob? Adversarial Attacks on Speaker Recognition Systems,” in 

Proc. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2021, pp. 694– 711. [39] S. Mehta, R. Tu, J. Beskow, ´ E. Sz´ ekely, and G. E. Henter, “Matcha-TTS: A Fast TTS Architecture with Conditional Flow Matching,” in 

Proc. ICASSP , 2024, pp. 11 341–11 345. [40] E. Casanova, K. Davis, E. G¨ olge, G. G¨ oknar, I. Gulea, L. Hart, A. Aljafari, J. Meyer, R. Morais, S. Olayemi, and J. Weber, “XTTS: a Massively Multilingual Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech Model,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2024, pp. 4978–4982. [41] S. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhou, S. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Wang, J. Li, L. He, S. Zhao, and F. Wei, “Neural Codec Language Models are Zero-Shot Text to Speech Synthesizers,” IEEE TASLP , vol. 33, pp. 705–718, 2025. [42] P. Peng, P.-Y. Huang, S.-W. Li, A. Mohamed, and D. Harwath, “Voice-Craft: Zero-shot speech editing and text-to-speech in the wild,” in Proc. ACL (Volume 1: Long Papers) , L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Srikumar, Eds., Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 2024, pp. 12 442–12 462. [43] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “LibriSpeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in Proc. ICASSP ,2015, pp. 5206–5210. [44] H. Zen, V. Dang, R. Clark, Y. Zhang, R. J. Weiss, Y. Jia, Z. Chen, and Y. Wu, “LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2019, pp. 1526–1530. [45] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” in Proc. ICLR , 2015. [46] A. W. Rix, J. G. Beerends, M. P. Hollier, and A. P. Hekstra, “Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2001, p. 749–752. [47] W. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Li, J. Wang, S. Cornell, M. Sach, K. Saijo, Y. Fu, Z. Ni, B. Han et al. , “UrgentMOS: Unified Multi-Metric and Preference Learning for Robust Speech Quality Assessment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18438 , 2026. [48] C. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, C.-H. H. Yang, and E. Chng, “Audio Large Language Models Can Be Descriptive Speech Quality Evaluators,” in Proc. ICLR , 2025. [49] S. Wang, W. Yu, X. Chen, X. Tian, J. Zhang, L. Lu, Y. Tsao, J. Yamagishi, Y. Wang, and C. Zhang, “QualiSpeech: A speech quality assessment dataset with natural language reasoning and descriptions,” in Proc. ACL (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Vienna, Austria, Jul. 2025, pp. 23 588–23 609. [50] H. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Yang, S. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Li, J. Zhou, H. Sun et al. , “SpeechLLM-as-Judges: Towards Gen-eral and Interpretable Speech Quality Evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14664 , 2025. [51] J. Shi, Z. Yuan, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, P. Zhou, L. Sun, and N. Z. Gong, “Optimization-based Prompt Injection Attack to LLM-as-a-Judge,” in 

Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2024, p. 660–674. [52] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not What You’ve Signed Up For: Compromising Real-World LLM-Integrated Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection,” in Proc. ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security , 2023, p. 79–90.