Title: An Audio Language Model-Based Voice Concept Bottleneck Framework for Interpretable Health Assessment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.16967v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 00:48:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
AN AUDIO LANGUAGE MODEL-BASED VOICE CONCEPT BOTTLENECK FRAMEWORK FOR INTERPRETABLE HEALTH ASSESSMENT 

Yu-Wen Chen, Julia Hirschberg 

Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, United States 

ABSTRACT 

Interpretability is critical in clinical decision support. Con-cept bottleneck frameworks improve it by representing inputs as human-understandable concepts and restricting predic-tions solely on them. However, research on their use for voice-based health assessment remains limited. In this study, we propose a voice concept bottleneck framework for inter-pretable health assessment using an audio language model (ALM). The ALM is fine-tuned on a voice quality assess-ment dataset to enhance its understanding of voice concepts and serves as an independent concept extractor, producing discrete, interpretable scores for a lightweight downstream classifier. The discrete concept scores provide intuitive in-terpretation, while the lightweight classifier facilitates post-hoc interpretability analyses. Results on depression and dysarthria assessment tasks demonstrate that the proposed framework can flexibly adapt voice concepts to different health conditions and consistently outperforms openSMILE-based and self-supervised speech model-based baselines. 

Index Terms — voice-based health assessment, concept bottleneck models, audio language models, voice biomarkers 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Vocal biomarkers provide valuable insights into an individ-ual’s health [1] and have enabled voice-based approaches for detecting and assessing various health conditions. While end-to-end neural approaches have shown promise [2], their lack of interpretability limits understanding of the factors driv-ing predictions, which is critical for clinical validation and decision-making. One strategy for improving interpretabil-ity is to introduce a concept bottleneck, which represents in-puts as human-interpretable concepts and restricts predictions to these concepts. In voice-based health assessment, openS-MILE [3] is widely employed to extract interpretable low-level acoustic concepts such as pitch, loudness, jitter, and shimmer. However, they are typically combined with less in-terpretable acoustic features [4, 5, 6], such as MFCCs, limit-ing the overall interpretability of the resulting models. Recently, a few studies have explored higher-level voice concepts for health assessment. For example, [7] investigated the correlation between self-supervised learning (SSL)-based speech model embeddings and interpretable voice-quality di-mensions, such as breathiness, in atypical speech. [8] and [9] developed concept bottleneck models that jointly learn health-related concepts and dysarthria or mild cognitive im-pairment assessment outcomes. However, jointly optimizing concept learning and downstream prediction may encourage task-specific shortcuts compared with using an independent concept extractor [10]. Moreover, these predefined concept bottlenecks lack flexibility for adaptation across tasks. Audio language models (ALMs) [11] can generate flexi-ble, human-understandable descriptions of audio conditioned on input prompts. ALMs have also demonstrated the ability to characterize voice concepts, such as prosody and fluency, associated with speakers’ health conditions [12]. However, existing ALM studies primarily focus on direct downstream applications [13]. While ALMs are capable of generating reasoning, such reasoning may not faithfully reflect the ev-idence present in the speech signal and may instead encode task-specific shortcuts. Furthermore, identifying the contri-bution of each part of the generated reasoning to the model’s final prediction is not straightforward. The potential of us-ing ALMs for voice concept bottlenecks with an independent classifier for health assessment has not been explored. In this study, we propose an ALM-based voice con-cept bottleneck framework for interpretable health assess-ment with three key advantages. First, we mitigate shortcut learning by decoupling the voice concept extractor from the downstream classifier, reducing the risk of task-specific shortcuts. Second, our framework enables flexible concept adaptation. Since diagnostically relevant voice concepts vary across health conditions, our method enables concept adaptation beyond predefined fine-tuning concepts, unlike conventional concept bottleneck approaches. Experimen-tal results on depression and dysarthria assessment tasks show that our approach outperforms openSMILE [3]- and SSL-based baselines, with task-adapted concepts leading to improved predictive performance. Third, our framework enhances interpretability by representing voice concepts on an intuitive 1–5 ordinal scale rather than continuous values. Combined with a lightweight downstream classifier, these de-signs enable the direct application of post-hoc interpretability methods, such as SHAP [14], to investigate the contribution of each voice concept to final predictions. arXiv:2607.16967v1 [eess.AS] 18 Jul 2026 Voice concept bottleneck 

Normal 

μ σ

(Adaptable 

to 

tasks)                    

> {"asthenia": 1,
> "breathiness": 2,
> "roughness": 3,
> "strain": 1,
> "loudness": 1,
> "pitch": 1,
> "overall_severity":3}
> …
> You are given an audio recording of a speaker. Your task is to
> analyze based only on acoustic information in the audio signal. Do
> not consider linguistic content or semantic meaning.
> Evaluate the following voice dimensions:
> -slow_speech_tempo : Speaking rate is slower than typical
> conversational speech.
> -reduced_pitch_variability : Voice exhibits reduced pitch variability.
> -low_intensity : Voice is unusually soft or has reduced vocal energy.
> -reduced_prosodic_expression : Voice lacks emotional expressiveness
> and sounds affectively neutral or monotonous.
> -long_or_frequent_pauses : Speech contains unusually long or frequent
> silent pauses.
> -reduced_articulation_clarity :Speech is slurred, mumbled, or
> otherwise unclear.
> -vocal_strain_or_tension : Voice sounds strained, tense, pressed, or
> effortful.
> Scoring Rules. Each score must be between 1 and 5
> 1 = not present / normal / within typical conversational voice
> 3 = moderate presence
> 5 = strongly and consistently present
> Higher value means the characteristic is more prominent or severe
> You are given an audio recording of a speaker. Your task is to analyze the
> voice quality based only on acoustic information in the audio signal. Do not
> consider linguistic content or semantic meaning.
> Evaluate the following voice dimensions:
> -asthenia : The degree of vocal weakness, thinness, or lack of power.
> -breathiness : The perception of audible air escaping through the vocal
> folds during phonation.
> -roughness: The presence of an irregular, scratchy, or fluctuating vocal
> quality.
> -strain: The perception of excessive tension, hyperfunction, or effort
> while speaking.
> -loudness: The perceptual correlation of intensity (whether too loud or too
> soft). Higher score indicates greater loudness abnormality.
> -pitch : Abnormality of pitch variation (monotone or atypical pitch
> behavior). Higher score if abnormal.
> -overall_severity :The overall severity or degree of the voice deviance or
> abnormality.
> Scoring Rules. Each score must be between 1 and 5
> 1 = not present / normal / within typical conversational voice
> 3 = moderate presence
> 5 = strongly and consistently present
> Higher value means the characteristic is more prominent or severe

Clinical Voice Quality (CVQ) prompt Speech Behavior (SB) prompt 

ALM Lightweight 

classifier Agg. 

(μ, σ) 

OR OR 

Abnormal Fig. 1 . Inference pipeline of the proposed ALM-based voice concept bottleneck framework. 

2. METHOD 

First, the ALM is fine-tuned on clinical voice quality assess-ment data to enhance its understanding of medically relevant voice concepts. It then extracts discrete bottleneck concept scores, which are aggregated at the speaker level for health assessment. Figure 1 illustrates the inference pipeline. 

2.1. ALM-based voice concept bottleneck 

To ensure reliable extraction of clinically meaningful con-cepts, we fine-tune the ALM on a voice quality dataset annotated by experienced clinicians using the Consensus Auditory-Perceptual Evaluation of Voice (CAPE-V) and GR-BAS scales. This perceptual supervision guides the model to capture clinically relevant voice concepts. We refer to the integrated attributes from both scales as Clinical Voice Quality (CVQ). During fine-tuning, the ALM is prompted with a CVQ template to optimize its performance on CVQ assessment tasks. In inference, we introduce an additional set of voice concepts, referred to as Speaking Behavior (SB), to evaluate the ALM’s ability to generalize beyond the con-cepts specified during fine-tuning. While CVQ focuses on clinical voice quality characteristics that are commonly as-sociated with physiological changes in the vocal system, SB emphasizes more on behavioral speech patterns. Detailed de-scriptions of the CVQ and SB voice concepts are provided in Figure 1. Voice concepts are measured on a discrete 1–5 or-dinal scale, with higher scores indicating a more pronounced vocal characteristic. This ordinal representation is selected because it mirrors human rating conventions and offers a more intuitive interpretation than continuous values. 

2.2. Health assessment with voice concept bottleneck 

We evaluate the proposed framework on two health con-ditions that affect speaker’s voice through distinct clinical mechanisms: depression and dysarthria. While depression is a mental health condition that introduces behavioral alter-ations, dysarthria is a disorder affecting vocal tract control. This diversity allows us to evaluate the framework’s flexi-bility in adapting its concept bottlenecks to different clinical conditions. We perform speaker-level evaluation by aggre-gating voice concept scores across all audio clips from the same speaker using their mean ( μ) and standard deviation (σ), forming a speaker-level representation. This represen-tation is used to train a lightweight downstream classifier. Instead of complex neural network architectures, we employ lightweight classifiers to enhance interpretability. By delib-erately restricting the capacity of the downstream model, we mitigate the risk that predictions rely on unintended latent shortcuts rather than the intended bottleneck concepts. 

3. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 3.1. Data Clinical voice quality : The Perceptual Voice Qualities Database (PVQD) [15] contains recordings of sustained vowels (/a/ and /i/) and six CAPE-V sentences from each speaker, with each speaker annotated with both CAPE-V and GRBAS. For attributes shared by both scales (i.e., overall severity, roughness, breathiness, and strain), we averaged the corresponding scores to obtain unified labels. For attributes unique to a single scale (i.e., asthenia from GRBAS and pitch and loudness from CAPE-V), the original ratings were re-tained. The dataset was split into training and test sets using an 80:20 speaker-level split. Since the recordings for each speaker are provided as a single audio file, we apply a voice activity detection model 1 to segment the audio into individual vowel and sentence recordings. During training, we applied Gaussian noise (amplitude range: 0.001–0.01, p = 0 .2), ran-dom gain (gain range: −2 to 2 dB, p = 0 .3), and polarity inversion ( p = 0 .5) for augmentation. Depression : We use the interview subset of the Android Corpus [16], in which all participants respond to the same set of questions posed by an interviewer. The subset contains 116 speakers (52 healthy controls and 64 speakers diagnosed with depression). We use the audio clips provided with the original dataset and follow the official five-fold cross-validation protocol for training and evaluation. Dysarthria : The TORGO corpus [17] comprises recordings of non-words, isolated words, and both restricted and unrestricted sentences from 8 dysarthric speakers and 7 healthy controls. Only headMic recordings are used, with leave-one-speaker-out cross-validation for evaluation. 

3.2. Model settings Settings for the proposed framework : For the ALM, we adopt Audio Flamingo Next [18] via Hugging Face (nvidia/audio-flamingo-next-think-hf ). Prior to training, con-tinuous labels are discretized into ordinal scales. We fine-tune ALM via LoRA, configuring all linear layers with a rank of 

4, an alpha of 32 , and a dropout rate of 0.1. Training is conducted with a learning rate of 1e-5 and a batch size of 1.The model is saved every 100 steps, and the one yielding the best performance is selected. For the downstream classifier, we utilize an XGBoost model configured with 100 estima-tors, a maximum tree depth of 6, and a learning rate of 0.1.

Settings for baseline models : The baseline methods replace the ALM voice concepts with OpenSMILE or SSL-based features while keeping the rest of the framework unchanged. Specifically, using the same configuration, the downstream classifier takes both mean and standard deviation computed across multiple audio clips from the same speaker as input. For the openSMILE baseline, we use the full eGeMAPSv02 

feature set, although some features in eGeMAPSv02 are not directly interpretable. For the SSL-based baselines, we adopt Vox-Profile [19], which uses Whisper as the backbone and extends it with multiple prediction heads to model diverse speech traits. We consider two Vox-Profile variants. (1) Vox-Profile: We employ ( tiantiaf/whisper-large-v3-voice-quality ), which estimates 25 voice quality attributes spanning pitch, texture, volume, clarity, and rhythm dimensions. (2) Vox-Profile CVQ : We extend the Vox-Profile with additional CVQ prediction heads by fine-tuning it on the PVQD dataset. The model is trained with MSE loss using SGD (lr = 5e-5,momentum = 0.7). Early stopping is applied, and the check-point with the best validation performance is retained. For recordings exceeding Vox-Profile’s 15 -second inference limit, 

> 1https://github.com/snakers4/silero-vad

we apply a 15 -second sliding window with a 7.5-second hop size. Final representations are obtained by averaging these segment-level predictions over time. 

4. RESULTS 4.1. Voice concepts bottleneck for depression assessment 

Table 1 presents the performance on depression. Results show that Flamingo fine-tuned with CVQ and inferred with SB (i.e., Flamingo CVQ →SB ) achieves the best performance. Using only 14 discrete features (each with five ordinal levels) with a relatively interpretable classifier (i.e., XGBoost), the model outperforms baselines that rely on less interpretable acoustic features (e.g., MFCCs in BS1 [16], BS2 [16], and OpenSMILE) and architectures (i.e., the LSTM used in BS2 [16]). Flamingo CVQ →CVQ outperforms Vox-Profile CVQ ,suggesting that ALM-based acoustic bottleneck features are more effective than SSL-based representations. In addition, Flamingo CVQ →CVQ outputs discrete scores in 1–5, which are more readily interpretable than the continuous outputs of Vox-Profile CVQ . The advantage of ALM is further supported by the performance of Flamingo CVQ →SB . In contrast to SSL-based models, where voice bottlenecks are constrained by fixed heads, ALMs allow flexible redefinition of bottleneck features to better align with downstream tasks. For exam-ple, for depression, voice characteristics are more related to speaker behavior than vocal-tract abnormalities, making SB bottleneck features more effective than CVQ. 

Table 1 . Performance on depression task. Flamingo A→B de-notes fine-tuned on A and evaluated with the B prompt. Precision Recall F1 Accuracy BS1 [16] 0.735 0.735 0.736 0.733 BS2 [16] 0.858 0.861 0.847 0.839 OpenSMILE (eGeMAPSv0) 0.752 0.773 0.752 0.725 Vox-Profile 0.682 0.755 0.703 0.657 Vox-Profile CVQ 0.656 0.692 0.664 0.630 Flamingo None →CVQ 0.700 0.731 0.691 0.664 Flamingo None →SB 0.767 0.689 0.719 0.715 Flamingo CVQ →CVQ 0.791 0.801 0.782 0.758 Flamingo CVQ →SB 0.888 0.881 0.871 0.862 

Figure 2 shows SHAP [14] analysis, which quantifies fea-ture contributions to model predictions for Flamingo CVQ →SB .For correctly classified samples, reduced pitch variability and slow speech tempo emerge as the two most important features, with their association with depression aligning with psychiatric literature describing depressive speech as slow and monotonous [20]. However, some non-depressed speak-ers also exhibit reduced pitch variability and slow speech tempo, as these vocal patterns can be influenced by factors other than depression. This overlap highlights the importance of interpretability in automated voice-based health assess-ment. By enabling clinicians to understand the rationale behind model predictions and assess the supporting evidence, interpretability helps calibrate their confidence in model out-puts for clinical decision-making. Correct predictions  Incorrect predictions 

> SHAP value
> Feature value
> High
> Low

Fig. 2 . SHAP analysis of depression prediction 

4.2. Voice concepts bottleneck for dysarthria assessment 

Table 2 summarizes the performance on the dysarthria as-sessment task, including both health status classification (i.e., determining whether a speaker has dysarthria) and severity assessment (i.e., estimating the severity level for speakers with dysarthria). The results demonstrate the ef-fectiveness of the ALM-based acoustic bottleneck approach, with Flamingo CVQ →CVQ achieving the best overall perfor-mance. In contrast to the depression assessment task, the CVQ feature set outperforms the SB feature set because dysarthria directly impairs the physiological mechanisms of speech production, making clinical voice quality a more di-rect indicator. Figure 3 shows box-plots of the average CVQ bottleneck feature scores across different groups extracted by Flamingo CVQ →CVQ . The results are consistent with the intuition that clinical voice quality abnormalities increase with dysarthria severity. Notably, for acoustic features such as asthenia, pitch, and roughness, the control and very low severity groups exhibit highly similar distributions, while a more pronounced separation emerges between the very low and low severity groups. 

4.3. Performance on voice concepts learning 

We calculate the Pearson correlations ( r) between the CVQ bottleneck scores and human ratings. Before fine-tuning, the ALM’s (Flamingo None ) scores for asthenia ( r=-0.018), abnormal loudness ( r=-0.019), abnormal pitch ( r=-0.008), and roughness ( r=-0.005) show little to no correlation with human ratings (average r=0.132). The poor correlation for 

Table 2 . Performance on dysarthria task ACC-class ACC-level PCC-level Hubert-24+SVM [5] 0.761 - -Hubert-10+CNN [5] - 0.498 -eGeMAPS+SVM [5] 0.594 0.421 -OpenSMILE (eGeMAPSv02) 0.533 0.375 0.348 Vox-Profile 0.800 0.500 0.467 Vox-Profile CVQ 0.800 0.625 0.577 Flamingo CVQ →CVQ 0.800 0.750 0.894    

> Flamingo CVQ →SB 0.733 0.375 0.554 Control
> Very low
> Low
> Medium

Fig. 3 . Average CVQ scores across dysarthria groups abnormal loudness and pitch probably stems from a mis-match between the ALM’s pretraining bias and CVQ defini-tions: ALM tends to associate higher pitch or loudness with higher scores, whereas CVQ ratings assign higher scores to both abnormally high and low levels. In contrast, overall severity shows the highest correlation among all concepts (r=0.482), perhaps because the model infers impairment from semantic coherence in the recordings. After fine-tuning, the SSL-based (Vox-Profile CVQ ) and the ALM-based models (Flamingo CVQ ) showed comparable performance on CVQ assessment, with moderate correlations with human ratings on average (Vox-Profile CVQ r=0.562, Flamingo CVQ r=0.519) .

5. CONCLUSION 

We introduce an ALM-based voice concept bottleneck frame-work for interpretable health assessment. We focus on inter-pretable voice concepts that go beyond commonly used low-level acoustic features (e.g., absolute pitch and loudness) by incorporating information from clinical voice quality. Our findings reveal that the pretrained ALM fails to faithfully cap-ture these voice concepts, establishing a clear need for fine-tuning. Crucially, this fine-tuning does not restrict the ALM to supervised concepts; instead, it enhances the model’s gen-eral capability in voice concept extraction, resulting in bet-ter performance on downstream tasks through adaptable con-cepts. Overall, we demonstrate the potential of ALMs for more interpretable clinical decision-support systems. 6. REFERENCES 

[1] Guy Fagherazzi, Aur´ elie Fischer, Muhannad Ismael, and Vladimir Despotovic, “Voice for health: the use of vocal biomarkers from research to clinical practice,” 

Digital biomarkers , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 78–88, 2021. [2] Yuxin Li, Sinchana Kumbale, Yanru Chen, Tanmay Surana, Eng Siong Chng, and Cuntai Guan, “Automated depression detection from text and audio: A systematic review,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Infor-matics , 2025. [3] Florian Eyben, Martin W¨ ollmer, and Bj¨ orn Schuller, “OpenSMILE: the munich versatile and fast open-source audio feature extractor,” in Proc. ACM MM ,2010, pp. 1459–1462. [4] Tuka Al Hanai, Mohammad M Ghassemi, and James R Glass, “Detecting depression with audio/text sequence modeling of interviews,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2018, pp. 1716–1720. [5] Farhad Javanmardi, Sudarsana Reddy Kadiri, and Paavo Alku, “Pre-trained models for detection and severity level classification of dysarthria from speech,” Speech Communication , vol. 158, pp. 103047, 2024. [6] Juliette Millet and Neil Zeghidour, “Learning to detect dysarthria from raw speech,” in Proc. ICASSP , 2019, pp. 5831–5835. [7] Jaya Narain, Vasudha Kowtha, Colin Lea, Lauren Tooley, Dianna Yee, Vikramjit Mitra, Zifang Huang, Miquel Espi Marques, Jon Huang, Carlos Avendano, and Shirley Ren, “Voice quality dimensions as inter-pretable primitives for speaking style for atypical speech and affect,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2025, pp. 4628–4632. [8] Lingfeng Xu, Julie Liss, and Visar Berisha, “Dysarthria detection based on a deep learning model with aclinically-interpretable layer,” JASA Express Letters ,vol. 3, no. 1, 2023. [9] Emma Cathrine Liisborg Leschly, Oliver Roesler, Michael Neumann, Jackson Liscombe, Abhishek Hosamath, Lakshmi Arbatti, Line H Clemmensen, Melanie Ganz, and Vikram Ramanarayanan, “An ex-ploration of interpretable deep learning models for the assessment of mild cognitive impairment,” in Proc. In-terspeech , 2025, pp. 271–275. [10] Andrei Margeloiu, Matthew Ashman, Umang Bhatt, Yanzhi Chen, Mateja Jamnik, and Adrian Weller, “Do concept bottleneck models learn as intended?,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop on Responsible AI , 2021. [11] Siddhant Arora, Kai-Wei Chang, Chung-Ming Chien, Yifan Peng, Haibin Wu, Yossi Adi, Emmanuel Dupoux, Hung-Yi Lee, Karen Livescu, and Shinji Watanabe, “On the landscape of spoken language models: A compre-hensive survey,” in Proc. TMLR , 2025. [12] Yu-Wen Chen, William Ho, Sasha M Vergez, Grace Fla-herty, Pallavi Gupta, Zhihong Zhang, Maryam Zolnoori, Margaret V McDonald, Maxim Topaz, Zoran Kostic, et al., “Hearing health in home healthcare: Leveraging llms for illness scoring and ALMs for vocal biomarker extraction,” in GenAI4Health , 2025. [13] Dingdong Wang, Shujie Liu, Tianhua Zhang, Youjun Chen, Jinyu Li, and Helen Meng, “EmotionThinker: Prosody-aware reinforcement learning for explainable speech emotion reasoning,” in Proc. ICLR , 2026. [14] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,” Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 30, 2017. [15] Patrick R Walden, “Perceptual voice qualities database (PVQD): database characteristics,” Journal of Voice ,vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 875–e15, 2022. [16] Fuxiang Tao, Anna Esposito, and Alessandro Vincia-relli, “The androids corpus: A new publicly available benchmark for speech based depression detection,” in 

Proc. Interspeech , 2023, pp. 4149–4153. [17] Frank Rudzicz, Aravind Kumar Namasivayam, and Talya Wolff, “The TORGO database of acoustic and articulatory speech from speakers with dysarthria,” Lan-guage resources and evaluation , vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 523– 541, 2012. [18] Sreyan Ghosh, Arushi Goel, Kaousheik Jayakumar, Lasha Koroshinadze, Nishit Anand, Zhifeng Kong, Sid-dharth Gururani, Sang-gil Lee, Jaehyeon Kim, Aya Alja-fari, et al., “Audio flamingo next: Next-generation open audio-language models for speech, sound, and music,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10905 , 2026. [19] Tiantian Feng, Jihwan Lee, Anfeng Xu, Yoonjeong Lee, Thanathai Lertpetchpun, Xuan Shi, Helin Wang, Thomas Thebaud, Laureano Moro-Velazquez, Dani Byrd, et al., “Vox-Profile: A speech foundation model benchmark for characterizing diverse speaker and speech traits,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14648 , 2025. [20] Nicholas Cummins, Stefan Scherer, Jarek Krajew-ski, Sebastian Schnieder, Julien Epps, and Thomas F Quatieri, “A review of depression and suicide risk as-sessment using speech analysis,” Speech communica-tion , vol. 71, pp. 10–49, 2015.