Title: TORUS: A Test of Rendering-Understanding Self-Coherence for Unified Audio Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28896v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 00:20:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# TORUS: A Test of Rendering-Understanding Self-Coherence for Unified Audio Models 

https://torus-benchmark.github.io/ 

Aryan Vijay Bhosale 1,2, Harshit Rajgarhia 1, Abhishek Mukherji 1†, Dinesh Manocha 2†

> 1

Centific Global Solutions Inc. 2University of Maryland 

{aryan.bhosale, harshit.rajgarhia}@centific.com 

Abstract 

Unified audio models capable of audio under-standing, audio generation and, increasingly, audio editing are proliferating rapidly. Yet a basic question about them remains unanswered: do the two heads of a unified model agree about the same audio? Current practice eval-uates each capability in isolation on special-ized benchmarks, and never asks whether a model can make sense of its own generations. We present TORUS, the first self-coherence test for audio-native unified models. TORUS comprises 48 three-stage self-coherence tests carrying 432 six-option questions spanning speech, sound and music across five task fam-ilies. We holistically evaluate five open uni-fied models alongside a Cascaded Baseline that combines state-of-the-art specialized genera-tion, editing and understanding models. The best unified model answers 50.5% of questions against the Cascaded Baseline’s 63.2% and a 16.7% chance floor. Models struggle on audio editing. Among the evaluated audio models (specialized and unified), we observe limited self-coherence, and we position self-coherence as an essential test for future audio systems. 

1 Introduction 

On the quest for audio general intelligence, we see the emergence of unified audio models (Yang et al., 2026; Tian et al., 2026a,b; Lu et al., 2024). A uni-fied audio model (as considered in this paper) is one that is capable of audio generation, understanding and editing. They echo the belief that representa-tions shared across tasks let each capability inform the others. Throughout this paper we view such a model as exposing two heads: a generation head (G) that renders or edits audio from instructions, and an understanding head ( U ) that answers ques-tions about audio. These models, however, are not tested to the extent of their abilities. Unified 

> ‡Equal advising. Work done during an internship at Centific.

models today report numbers on specialized bench-marks: understanding on audio QA suites (Sakshi et al., 2025; Kumar et al., 2026), generation on fidelity and adherence suites (Wang et al., 2026c; He et al., 2025), editing on instruction-following metrics (Zhang et al., 2026; Ma et al., 2026), i.e. each grading one head in isolation. A model can place well on all three leaderboards while nothing certifies that its two heads agree about the same piece of audio. No benchmark measures the unified 

property these models actually claim. Vision has recently begun to close this loop, let-ting a unified model generate, edit and answer ques-tions about its own images (Liu et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026d,a). The unified audio models space is still shaping up and we lack a concrete analogous evaluation for audio models. However, transfer self-evaluation from vision to au-dio is not a trivial task. Questions about audio carry unusually strong text priors since both modalities represent languages heavily. Audio, being innately 

temporal , also brings its own task structure which can span across physical causality and scene acous-tics to temporal ordering, which have few to no visual analogs. An audio-native self-coherence benchmark must therefore be constructed against 

text-prior leakage and around audio’s own tasks transcending tasks inspired by vision. To tackle these issues, we introduce TORUS (Test of Rendering-Understanding 

Self-Coherence) comprising 48 three-stage self-coherence tests spanning 432 questions with each stage involving a clear Render (audio generation and editing) and Evaluate Phase (audio understand-ing and reasoning) to close the coherence loop through 9 multi-choice questions (MCQs). The questions are produced through an elaborate data curation pipeline that prevents answer leakages through the questions while reasonably testing the unified nature of such models (Fig. 3). We evaluate self-coherence of a model in terms of its ability to arXiv:2607.28896v1 [cs.SD] 30 Jul 2026 Figure 1: Left: Self-evaluation and objective metrics of models. Larger radius = better, rim = perfect. Right: TORUS: 16 tests per audio type (left); 432 questions over five task families (right). 

faithfully generate audio scenes, reason about them and answer questions. This is quantified through % accuracy on TORUS questions defined in terms of a Coherence Metric (Section 4.4). Tests are balanced across all audio types (speech, sound and music), and span five task families for coverage. On TORUS we evaluate 5 open unified models and, alongside them, a Cascaded Baseline that chains state-of-the-art specialized generation, editing and understanding models. The best unified model answers 50.5% of questions against the baseline’s 63.2% (Fig. 1) which further motivates the need for active work in this field. Our contributions are: • The first audio-native self-coherence bench-mark. 48 three-stage tests (generation, edit, counterfactual edit) with 432 six-option ques-tions across all audio types and 5 task families, built by a leak-checked, human-authored and human-verified pipeline (Section 3). • A leak-checked test-generation pipeline. 

A human-authored, human-verified pipeline whose coupled gate tests every question against a muted-audio solver and an ideal-generation solver and a recipe for audio-native self-coherence benchmark construction at larger scales (Section 3.2). • Evidence of limited self-coherence in cur-rent audio models. Through the first joint evaluation (self-evaluation & objective met-rics) of five open unified models and a Cas-caded Baseline of SOTA specialized genera-tion, editing and understanding models (Table 2), we show unified models trail the special-ized models by 12.7% at best and 41.4% at worst. Evaluated specialized models (Cas-caded Baseline) achieve 63.2% accuracy on TORUS. We note how all evaluated systems degrade once editing begins (Stage 2 and Stage 3) implying need for further research au-dio models in general, not just unified models, need to become better (Sections 4, 5). 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Audio Understanding & Reasoning Benchmarks 

Table 1 situates TORUS against the closest bench-marks along the axes that define it. Benchmarks such as MMAU and MMAU-Pro (Sakshi et al., 2025; Kumar et al., 2026) grade text answers about 

given audio while compositional, relational and reasoning suites like CompA (Ghosh et al., 2024), MMAR (Ma et al., 2025), MMSU (Wang et al., 2026b) and ADQA-Bench (He et al., 2026b) ex-pand on the idea. Across all of them the model’s output is a label, never a sound, and the audio is never the model’s own. TORUS maintains this family’s grading discipline (with keys fixed at con-struction time, scored by exact letter match) and extends it to generation and editing: the clip under question is one that has been generated or edited by the model itself. Questions about audio tend to leak their own answers through their sentence framing i.e. the model doesn’t need to listen to the audio to answer well. This is usually measured after the fact as shown by (Foo et al., 2026). ADQA-Bench (He et al., 2026b,a) instead screens for it while the ques-tions are being written. TORUS does the same, with two gates: a question is flagged and rewritten if a solver answers it correctly with no audio, or if a solver fails it even when given a perfect description of the audio (Section 3.2). Modality Tasks Protocol Benchmark V Sp So Mu U G E Counterfactual Leak-checked key                                                                                                    

> MMAU (Sakshi et al., 2025) ✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗•
> MMAU-Pro (Kumar et al., 2026) ✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗•
> ADQA-Bench (He et al., 2026b) ✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✓
> CompA (Ghosh et al., 2024) ✗✗✓✗✓✗✗✓•
> RiTTA (He et al., 2025) ✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✗
> TTA-Bench (Wang et al., 2026c) ✗✓✓✓✗✓✗✗✗
> SpeechEditBench (Zhang et al., 2026) ✗✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✗
> MMAE (Ma et al., 2026) ✗✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✗
> MME-Unify (Xie et al., 2026) ✓✗✗✗✓✓✓✗✗
> UmniBench (Liu et al., 2025) ✓✗✗✗✓✓✓✓✗
> TORUS (ours) ✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓

Table 1: TORUS vs. the closest benchmarks. V/Sp/So/Mu: vision, speech, sound, music; U/G/E: understanding, generation, editing. Counterfactual : one flipped attribute must change the answer; Leak-checked key : sealed construction-time answer, verified against a no-audio solver ( •: key exists, never leak-checked). Per-cell evidence: Appendix B. 

2.2 Audio Generation & Editing Benchmarks 

The complementary literature grades audio a model produces, but consults everyone about it except the model itself. This may have been justified at the time since unified audio models have evolved more recently. Generation suites such as TTA-Bench (Wang et al., 2026c) and RiTTA (He et al., 2025) score fidelity and prompt adherence with em-bedding metrics, rubric judges and human ratings. Editing suites such as SpeechEditBench (Zhang et al., 2026) and MMAE (Ma et al., 2026), building on instruction-guided editing work (AUDIT (Wang et al., 2023), zero-shot DDPM-inversion edit-ing (Manor and Michaeli, 2024)) do the same for edits applied to audio clips. They faithfully an-swer the question: how good does the audio sound? TORUS exploits the unified nature of this model to ask: how does the audio sound to the model itself ?Through its multi-stage, multi-phase benchmarking strategy, TORUS not only forces models to pro-pogate ideal generations and edits through stages but also probes into how well unified model’s un-derstanding head is able to reason about genera-tions. 

2.3 Unified Models and Closed-Loop Evaluation 

Unified audio models now generate and under-stand audio in one system -UniAudio-2 (Yang et al., 2026), UALM (Tian et al., 2026a), Audex (Kong et al., 2026), Unified-IO 2 (Lu et al., 2024) - and some, such as Audio-Omni (Tian et al., 2026b) can also perform audio editing natively. This makes a new question askable for the first time: do a model’s two heads agree about a clip it produced itself? Vision and omni-modal models reached this point earlier, and MME-Unify (Xie et al., 2026) and UmniBench (Liu et al., 2025) investigate this by chaining a model’s generations through depen-dent stages and questioning the model on its own images (Wang et al., 2026d,a; Li et al., 2025). In audio, AQAScore (Kuan et al., 2026) closes a generate-then-understand loop but scores another model’s output with an external judge. Porting the vision protocol directly would not work: ques-tions about audio carry unusually strong text pri-ors and can often be answered without listening at all (Foo et al., 2026; He et al., 2026a). Further audio tasks, from scene acoustics to temporal or-dering, have few visual analogs. TORUS is built audio-native from the ground up: keys state more than the prompt does, the prompt is withheld at an-swering time, and every question is leak-checked before it enters the bank (Section 3.2). Unified audio models (Yang et al., 2026; Tian et al., 2026a,b; Kong et al., 2026; Lu et al., 2024) motivate our benchmark and form its subject pool (Section 4); several further candidates cover too few audio types to close the loop at all, a fragmen-tation we document in Table 3. In vision, MME-Unify (Xie et al., 2026), UmniBench (Liu et al., 2025) and successors measuring cross-task consis-tency and the understanding–generation gap (Wang et al., 2026d,a; Li et al., 2025) question a unified model on its own images, chaining generations through dependent stages — the closest relatives of our protocol. In audio, AQAScore (Kuan et al., 2026) closes a generate-then-understand loop, but with an external judge scoring another model’s gen-erations. TORUS therefore sits at the meeting point of two lines that have not met: it takes the closed loop from the vision family and the deterministic, construction-keyed grading from the audio under-standing family, and adds the piece neither has — Figure 2: Benchmarking pipeline and evaluation strategy for unified audio models that are capable of audio generation, editing and understanding. A self-coherence test comprises 3 stages (Generation/Edit/Counterfactual Edit) each testing different abilities of the model. Prompts (text +audio) are passed to the generation head ( G) which generates/edits audio which is passed to the understanding head ( U ) for answering 3 six-option MCQs per stage. Coherence is computed as % of questions answered correctly by the model. Refer to Fig. 6 for details on how models without native editing have been benchmarked. 

sealed keys that state more than the prompt does, a prompt-free answering protocol, and a leak check on every question. UmniBench, by contrast, de-rives its keys directly from the prompt and its pro-tocol carries the prompt forward, which in principle permits scoring by instruction echo rather than per-ception. 

3 The TORUS Benchmark 

TORUS is designed to holistically evaluate unified audio models that have the ability to perform a ver-satile set of tasks. The unified models are capable of audio understanding, generation and in some cases editing. It is composed of 48 self-coherence tests comprising 432 questions, spanning multiple audio types (speech, music & sound) that test uni-fied models’ abilities on 5 diverse task families. Section 2 further builds our position compared to existing benchmarks. Unified models usually expose 2 heads: a gen-eration head ( G) that renders audio from instruc-tions and an understanding head ( U ) that answers questions about audio. Across literature and im-plementations, the heads share weights to varying degrees. TORUS seeks to answer a fundamental question about unified models: Do their 2 heads share agreement about the same audio? Irrespec-tive of the representations used in each head, these models should at least be self-coherent with both heads finding some common ground semantically. This drove us to develop TORUS as a basic first sanity check for such models. Given that unified models can generate and understand audio, one would expect them to be able to self-evaluate and improve. Before we can expect these models to evaluate themselves, we must check whether they can make sense of their own generations. 

3.1 Task formulation 

TORUS measures self-coherence between the un-derstanding and generation heads of a unified model through 48 self-coherence tests (sometimes abbreviated as ’ test ’ in this paper): the generation head ( G) first generates or edits audio, and the understanding head ( U ) then answers six-option multiple-choice questions (MCQs) based on the generated audio. A test is composed of 3 stages: Figure 3: The test-generation pipeline: human-authored seed → test architect → question author → coupled gate (muted-audio + ideal-generation solvers, two repair rounds) → human verification. 

• Generation (Stage 1) tests audio generation :

G is provided a generation prompt ( pgen ) to generate an audio scene ( agen ), and U answers 3 MCQs ( Qgen ) given the generated audio as context. • Edit (Stage 2) tests audio editing : G is pro-vided agen and an edit prompt ( pedit ) to alter the scene at hand, and U answers 3 MCQs (Qedit ) given the edited audio aedit . Since few models in the space support native audio edit-ing, we describe how models without it realize this step in Section 4.3. • Counterfactual Edit (Stage 3) tests scene-based counterfactual reasoning while explic-itly testing the model’s ability to preserve gen-eration quality across a multi-stage edit: G

edits aedit given a counterfactual edit prompt (pcf ) that alters one controlled attribute of the scene, resulting in a distinct acoustic outcome, and U answers 3 MCQs ( Qcf ) given acf . The edit is implicitly required rather than asked for, and succeeding demands that all aspects of the audio were selectively preserved and modified through agen → aedit → acf .The MCQs in all 3 stages test audio understand-ing and reasoning . Each stage further divides into a Render Phase, where audio is generated or edited, and an Evaluate Phase, where audio is un-derstood and reasoned over to answer questions. Each self-coherence test thus involves 3 audios be-ing produced/edited and 9 six-option MCQs being answered. Algorithm 1 further details how a test is carried out, and Fig. 2 walks through an example. 

3.2 Data Curation and Validation 

Recent literature usually deals with audio un-derstanding, generation and editing in isolation; TORUS instead presents an amalgamation of these tasks, which demands a dedicated curation process. We design a test-generation pipeline with human involvement at both ends (Fig. 3): • Human-authored seed. A seed defines the progression of the stages in the test through 

scene , intervention , initial acoustic outcome ,the attribute to be altered and the counterfac-tual outcome .• Test Architect. A frontier LLM (here, 

gemini-3.5-flash ) expands the seed into the generation/edit prompts for the 3 stages and describes expected characteristics and 

specifications of the produced audio for each stage, including the transcript for tests involv-ing speech. • Question Author. The LLM uses the specifi-cations of the ideal audio to isolate 3 distinct attributes/elements (’ keys ’) per stage that the understanding head should be able to discern given the audio, and authors one six-option question per key, i.e. 9 candidate questions. • Coupled Gate. We wish to avoid 2 cases: (A) the question is too easy and an audio model can guess the answer without even hearing the audio by relying on its text priors, and (B) the question is too difficult or vague to answer even given the perfect audio. A Muted Audio Solver Gate , an audio understanding model (Audio-Flamingo-Next (Ghosh et al., 2026)) with text priors current unified models should possess, attempts each question given 1 sec-ond of silence and flags those it answers cor-rectly (case A). An Ideal Generation Solver ,an LLM ( gpt-5.6-luna ) given the specifica-tions of the ideal audio, flags questions it is unable to answer (case B). Flagged questions return to the Question Author for up to two repair rounds (Appendix D). • Human Verification. All questions, prompts and associated metadata are reviewed by hu-mans who decide whether the test adequately and reasonably evaluates audio understanding, reasoning, generation and editing. In this way, our benchmark contains 432 verified questions (48 tests), authored (start) and validated (end) by human authors to ensure high quality. 

4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Unified Models 

We evaluate 5 unified audio models that are capable of audio generation, understanding and editing to varying extents. The capabilities of each model along with support audio types are presented in Table 3. We evaluate Audio-Omni (Tian et al., 2026b), Audex-30B and Audex-2B (Kong et al., 2026), UniAudio-2 (Yang et al., 2026) and Unified-IO 2 (Lu et al., 2024) on TORUS. Implementation detail and settings for each are provided in the Appendix A. These models were chosen since they are the most capable across audio types and tasks. 

4.2 Cascaded Baseline Construction 

For comparison, we construct a Cascaded Base-line consisting of SOTA audio generation, edit-ing and understanding models. We use Tan-goFlux (Hung et al., 2026) for sound generation, ACE-Step 1.5 (Gong et al., 2026) for music gen-eration, Step-Audio-EditX (Yan et al., 2025) for speech generation and editing, MMEdit (Tao et al., 2025) (audio editing) for sound and music editing and gpt-audio for audio understanding. Further information about each model may be found in Appendix A. We hypothesize that unified models should ideally be more self-coherent than special-ized models since they have the ability to share representations across tasks and audio types. This baseline serves as a neat comparison against unified models and also helps us understand how SOTA specialized audio models perform in general. 

4.3 Evaluation Strategy 

The detailed procedure for how a test is executed can be seen in Fig. 2 and in Alg. 1. As previously established, TORUS is designed for models that can understand, generate and natively edit audio. Since this space is still developing, there are not many unified models that can support native au-dio editing given an audio clip. Our hope is that more such models be developed and tested for self-coherence. However, we believe unified models that cannot do audio editing should also satisfy self-coherence and test them as follows. Since the model cannot take audio input for doing audio gen-eration, we decompose this task into 2 parts: audio captioning and text-to-audio (or wherever applica-ble text-to-speech) generation. The understanding head ( U ) of the model first captions the audio gen-erated by the generation head ( G) in that stage and this caption is passed as prompt for audio gener-ation. This is referred to as the ’self-caption edit’ chain in this paper. Both cases are treated indi-vidually with models that supported both reported separately. The Cascaded Baseline features a spe-cialized generator, editor and reasoner per audio type. For every stage, the generator/editor gener-ates audio and the reasoner answers the questions. 

4.4 Metrics Self-Evaluation Metrics Coherence (main metric for quantifying self-coherence). We introduce coherence as the % of questions answered correctly by the model after following the strategy in Section 4.3. It quantifies the self-coherence shown by the model on a given test and is noted as an aggregate, by stage, task family and audio type in this paper. 

Objective Evaluation WER. Whisper large-v3 (Radford et al., 2023) transcripts scored with jiwer (Vaessen, 2025) against the test’s authored stage transcript. Non-speech stages are excluded in calculation. 

Distributional Generation Metrics. FAD (Kil-gour et al., 2019) (VGGish embeddings (Hershey et al., 2017)), FD (CLAP-space (Wu et al., 2023)), and KL (PaSST (Koutini et al., 2022) logits over 527 AudioSet classes (Gemmeke et al., 2017), following AudioCraft’s convention (Copet et al., 2023)) are computed against the Cascaded Base-line generated set (144 clips). 

Post-generation modality check. We calculate CM, a sanity check metric to check whether the cor-rect modality was generated. For every audio, we calculate CLAP ( laion/clap-htsat-unfused )score over 4 labels {speech, music, sound, noise} and compare the argmax label against the expected modality for the test. All experiments presented in this paper were performed on a single NVIDIA Coherence (Self-Evaluation) Objective Evaluation Model S1 ↑ S2 ↑ S3 ↑ Total ↑ CM (%) ↑ WER ↓ KL ↓ FAD ↓ FD ↓                                                                

> Cascaded Baseline 73.6 ±7.6 50.7 ±10.8 65.3 ±9.3 63.2 ±6.3 59.0 ±12.1 0.0 ---
> Models with a native audio-in edit operation
> Audio-Omni 50.7 ±6.6 37.5 ±7.6 40.3 ±6.6 42.8 ±4.1 58.3 ±11.5 1.115 ±0.123 1.65 ±0.21 8.41 0.56
> Models with the self-caption edit chain
> Audex-30B 52.8 ±7.6 50.7 ±9.0 47.9 ±8.0 50.5 ±4.7 59.7 ±12.1 1.270 ±0.232 2.07 ±0.27 6.51 0.69 Audio-Omni (self-caption) 50.7 ±6.9 38.2 ±6.2 41.0 ±6.2 43.3 ±3.5 52.8 ±12.5 1.128 ±0.202 1.781 ±0.172 6.35 0.51
> Audex-2B 41.7 ±7.6 26.4 ±7.3 38.2 ±8.3 35.4 ±4.4 47.9 ±11.8 1.027 ±0.044 2.52 ±0.41 9.58 0.80 UniAudio-2 25.0 ±7.9 21.5 ±6.2 23.6 ±7.0 23.4 ±4.1 40.3 ±11.4 1.247 ±0.293 2.27 ±0.30 9.33 0.71 Unified-IO 2 22.2 ±6.6 22.9 ±6.6 20.1 ±7.7 21.8 ±3.7 42.4 ±11.2 0.952 ±0.052 2.50 ±0.33 8.12 0.81

Table 2: Main results on TORUS (432 questions; chance 16.7%; metric definitions in Section 4.4). ±: 95% cluster-bootstrap CIs over tests; FAD/FD are set-level distances (no CI); Bold is best per column. 

H100 GPU. Further details about the experimental setup can be found in Appendix A. 

5 Results and Discussion 

Table 2 reports unified models’ performance across self-coherence based and objective metrics on TORUS compared across a baseline of cascaded audio understanding, generation and editing mod-els (Cascaded Baseline). Several patterns can be seen to emerge. 

5.1 General Lack of Self-Coherence 

Coherence is computed on six-option MCQs, i.e. random guessing yields ∼16.7%. The Cascaded Baseline reaches 63.2%, far above chance, and serves as a strong reference point for how special-ized models fare on such a test. Ideally, a unified model should hold an advantage here: its genera-tion and understanding heads share representations. In practice, the best unified model answers only 50.5% of questions, and every unified model trails the Cascaded Baseline by at least 12.7% (roughly 55 questions) and in some cases 41.4% (Table 2). The stage breakdown localizes the failure. Most systems peak at Stage 1, which tests generation and understanding, and drop once editing enters at Stages 2 and 3. Two profiles emerge: the Cascaded Baseline, Audio-Omni and Audex-2B recover at Stage 3 (S3 > S2), suggesting their counterfac-tual reasoning is stronger than their editing, while UniAudio-2 and Unified-IO 2 stay near-flat at 20– 25%, above chance but indicating weaker genera-tion and self-knowledge. Scale helps: Audex-30B outperforms Audex-2B at every stage. More such stage-wise trends are analyzed per model in Ap-pendix C. 

5.2 Objective metrics make the story clearer 

Objective metrics probe the Render and Evaluate Phases of each stage separately (Table 2). 

Render Phase. On distributional metrics (KL, FAD, FD against the Cascaded Baseline), unified models land close to specialized generators and editors. Crucially, render quality does not predict Coherence. Audio-Omni leads all three distances yet trails Audex-30B in Coherence: its Render Phase orders the correct events well, but its Eval-uate Phase cannot read them back. Conversely, Audex-2B sits at or near the bottom of every dis-tance while out-answering two systems with vis-ibly better render statistics, and Unified-IO 2 at-tains the lowest WER (0.952) despite the weakest Coherence—rendering intelligible speech and un-derstanding it are independent capabilities. 

Evaluate Phase. Coherence itself traces the Eval-uate Phase (Section 5.1). As a check on what reaches it, we measure how often models gener-ate the correct modality (CM): even the best spe-cialized and unified generators produce the wrong modality or noise roughly 40% of the time (CM 

∼60%). We draw attention to this fact and encour-age the development of more robust and faithful audio generation. In this way, WER, CM and the distributional metrics probe the quality of the generation while Coherence probes the model’s understanding of what it generated. Distributional polish does not predict Coherence, but semantically correct render-ing is what the Evaluate Phase consumes—so low self-coherence cannot be attributed to either phase alone, and substantial work is needed at both ends. This further motivates benchmarks and metrics like Figure 4: Blind pairwise A/B study of human preference on model generations (7 raters, 315 judgments). Full protocol, reliability metrics and the pairwise win-rate matrix are in Appendix E. 

TORUS and Coherence. Extended phase analy-sis, including Audio-Omni’s native vs. self-caption editing contrast, is provided in Appendix C. 

5.3 Human preference confirms the dissociation 

To disentangle generative fidelity from self-understanding, we ran a blind pairwise A/B pref-erence study over the systems’ generation heads: seven raters adjudicated 315 judgments over a strat-ified sample of the systems’ outputs, choosing on each trial the rendering with greater fidelity to the specified scene. Inter-rater reliability on decisive judgments was moderate (Fleiss κ = 0.377), con-sistent with the perceptual difficulty of near-quality comparisons; the full protocol and design are de-tailed in Appendix E. Fig. 4 shows that the two strongest unified mod-els are preferred over the specialist Cascaded Base-line on generative fidelity: Audio-Omni attains a 54.3% win rate and Audex-30B 51.4% against the cascade’s 46.7%. These three form a top tier, separated by roughly ten points from Audex-2B, UniAudio-2 and Unified-IO 2 (31–38%). Given the sample size, orderings within the top tier are descriptive rather than significant; the robust read-ing is the tier structure and, critically, the disso-ciation. The systems preferred over the baseline perceptually are the same ones that trail it on Co-herence: Audio-Omni is the most preferred system in generative fidelity yet trails the baseline by 20 Coherence points. Unified models already synthe-size audio comparable to, and at times preferred over, a pipeline of task specialists; their deficit on TORUS is not one of generative quality but of com-prehending their own output. 

5.4 Trend across audio types and task families 

Fig. 5 breaks Coherence down by task family and audio type. Across families, the cascaded-vs-unified gap is widest on Physical causality (70.2% vs. 48.9% best): specialized generators are adept at inferring what an intervention sounds like from a prompt that solely names the intervention, while unified models struggle to track what an event does to the scene. Conversely, unified models draw level with the Cascaded Baseline on Source composition (50% vs. 50% best), an encouraging sign that they can understand what is present in a scene. Across audio types, the gap is widest on sound tests (68.5% vs. 46.0%, Audex-30B), while speech is near parity (59.3% vs. 54.2%, Audex-30B). This seems consistent with the sizable proportion of speech training data across the literature and the long history of text-to-speech and speech recogni-tion as foundational problems in audio processing. Interestingly, both classes of models perform worst on music tests, drawing attention to the need for further research on musical generation and under-standing. 

6 Conclusion, Limitations and Future Work 

TORUS asks a question no existing audio bench-mark asks unified audio models: can a model make sense of its own generations? Across 48 leak-checked, human-verified tests, the evaluated unified and specialized systems show limited self-coherence. Unified models trail a Cascaded Base-line of specialized models by 12.7% to 41.4%. All evaluated systems peak at pure generation and de-grade once editing begins, marking audio editing as the clearest open problem the benchmark exposes. The failure cannot be pinned on either phase alone. Render quality does not solely track self-coherence and the burden of self-coherence is shared with the evaluate phase. Even the best systems generate the wrong modality roughly 40% of the time and hence work needs to be done at both ends of the loop. This holds equally true for the evaluated cas-cade of specialized models. Self-coherence, there-fore, is a property the field has assumed but seldom measured. We would like to note that our construction of the cascaded baseline is meant solely for maintaining a level field. Unified models can consume broader training data and share representations across tasks. Our expectation is that they should ultimately sur-Figure 5: Coherence by task family (left) and audio type (right). Whiskers: 95% cluster-bootstrap CIs over tests; dashed line: 16.7% chance; Audio-Omni: native-edit arm. 

pass cascades of specialists, not merely approach them. The baseline marks what is attainable by casacades of specialists today and hope this posi-tion evolves in the future. We use Coherence (%) as an intial metric for measuring self-coherence to intiate an open dialogue on its important and en-courage the development of more metrics to better quantify it. Since limited unified models support native audio editing we resort to the self-caption edit chain (which may conflate captioning fidelity with editing fidelity). Editing subsumes understand-ing, reasoning and generation. We strongly be-lieve more unified models (with editing) capability should emerge so that we can further investigate the presence of self-coherence. All tests are English-only. TORUS remains a prerequisite check for self-coherence and our experiments and findings inspire progress in this field. 

References 

Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexandre Defossez. 2023. Simple and controllable music gen-eration. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems 36 (NeurIPS) .Leonardo Haw-Yang Foo, Chih-Kai Yang, Chen-An Li, Ke-Han Lu, and Hung-yi Lee. 2026. All that glitters is not audio: Rethinking text priors and au-dio reliance in audio-language evaluation. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.24401. Jort F. Gemmeke, Daniel P. W. Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R. Channing Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. 2017. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for audio events. In IEEE International Conference on Acous-tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 776–780. Sreyan Ghosh, Arushi Goel, Kaousheik Jayakumar, Lasha Koroshinadze, Nishit Anand, Zhifeng Kong, Siddharth Gururani, Sang-gil Lee, Jaehyeon Kim, Aya Aljafari, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Sungwon Kim, Ramani Duraiswami, Dinesh Manocha, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, Ming-Yu Liu, and Wei Ping. 2026. Audio flamingo next: Next-generation open audio-language models for speech, sound, and music. Preprint , arXiv:2604.10905. Sreyan Ghosh, Ashish Seth, Sonal Kumar, Utkarsh Tyagi, Chandra Kiran Evuru, S. Ramaneswaran, S. Sakshi, Oriol Nieto, Ramani Duraiswami, and Dinesh Manocha. 2024. CompA: Addressing the gap in compositional reasoning in audio-language models. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Junmin Gong, Yulin Song, Wenxiao Zhao, Sen Wang, Shengyuan Xu, Jing Guo, and Xuerui Yang. 2026. ACE-Step 1.5: Pushing the bound-aries of open-source music generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.00744. Haolin He, Xingjian Du, Renhe Sun, Zheqi Dai, Yujia Xiao, Mingru Yang, Jiayi Zhou, Xiquan Li, Zhengxi Liu, Zining Liang, Chunyat Wu, Qianhua He, Tan Lee, Xie Chen, Wei-Long Zheng, Weiqiang Wang, Mark Plumbley, Jian Liu, and Qiuqiang Kong. 2026a. Measuring audio’s impact on correctness: Audio-contribution-aware post-training of large audio lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Haolin He, Renhe Sun, Zheqi Dai, Xingjian Du, Chun-yat Wu, Jiayi Zhou, Xiquan Li, Yun Chen, Xie Chen, Zhiyao Duan, Weiqiang Wang, Mark D. Plumb-ley, Jian Liu, and Qiuqiang Kong. 2026b. Audio-dependent question answering (DCASE 2026 chal-lenge task 5). DCASE 2026 Challenge Task 5: task description and ADQA-Bench evaluation set. Yuhang He, Yash Jain, Xubo Liu, Andrew Markham, and Vibhav Vineet. 2025. RiTTA: Modeling event relations in text-to-audio generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3497–3511. Shawn Hershey, Sourish Chaudhuri, Daniel P. W. El-lis, Jort F. Gemmeke, Aren Jansen, R. Channing Moore, Manoj Plakal, Devin Platt, Rif A. Saurous, Bryan Seybold, Malcolm Slaney, Ron J. Weiss, and Kevin W. Wilson. 2017. CNN architectures for large-scale audio classification. In IEEE International Con-ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 131–135. Chia-Yu Hung, Navonil Majumder, Zhifeng Kong, Am-buj Mehrish, Amir Ali Bagherzadeh, Chuan Li, Rafael Valle, Bryan Catanzaro, and Soujanya Po-ria. 2026. TangoFlux: Super fast and faithful text to audio generation with flow matching and CLAP-ranked preference optimization. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Inclusion AI et al. 2025. Ming-Omni: A unified multi-modal model for perception and generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.09344. Kevin Kilgour, Mauricio Zuluaga, Dominik Roblek, and Matthew Sharifi. 2019. Fréchet audio distance: A reference-free metric for evaluating music enhance-ment algorithms. In Proc. Interspeech 2019 , pages 2350–2354. Zhifeng Kong, Sang-gil Lee, Jaehyeon Kim, Boxin Wang, Zihan Liu, Sungwon Kim, Yang Chen, Arushi Goel, Rajarshi Roy, Wenliang Dai, Zhuolin Yang, Yangyi Chen, Dongfu Jiang, Sreyan Ghosh, Tuomas Rintamaki, Andrew Tao, Jonathan Raiman, Moham-mad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, and Wei Ping. 2026. Unified audio intelligence without regressing on text intelligence. Preprint , arXiv:2607.05196. Khaled Koutini, Jan Schlüter, Hamid Eghbal-zadeh, and Gerhard Widmer. 2022. Efficient training of audio transformers with patchout. In Proc. Interspeech 2022 , pages 2753–2757. Chun-Yi Kuan, Kai-Wei Chang, and Hung-yi Lee. 2026. AQAScore: Evaluating semantic alignment in text-to-audio generation via audio question answering. 

Preprint , arXiv:2601.14728. Sonal Kumar, Šimon Sedláˇ cek, Vaibhavi Lokegaonkar, Fernando López, Wenyi Yu, Nishit Anand, Hyeong-gon Ryu, Lichang Chen, Maxim Pliˇ cka, Miroslav Hlaváˇ cek, William Fineas Ellingwood, Sathvik Udupa, Siyuan Hou, Allison Ferner, Sara Barahona, Cecilia Bolaños, Satish Rahi, Laura Herrera-Alarcón, Satvik Dixit, and 15 others. 2026. MMAU-Pro: A challenging and comprehensive benchmark for holis-tic evaluation of audio general intelligence. Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,40(27):22688–22697. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gon-zalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serv-ing with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) ,pages 611–626. Yi Li, Haonan Wang, Qixiang Zhang, Boyu Xiao, Chen-chang Hu, Hualiang Wang, and Xiaomeng Li. 2025. UniEval: Unified holistic evaluation for unified mul-timodal understanding and generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.10483. Kai Liu, Leyang Chen, Wenbo Li, Zhikai Chen, Zhixin Wang, Renjing Pei, Linghe Kong, and Yulun Zhang. 2025. UmniBench: Unified understand and gener-ation model oriented omni-dimensional benchmark. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.17196. Shansong Liu, Atin Sakkeer Hussain, Qilong Wu, Chen-shuo Sun, and Ying Shan. 2024. MuMu-LLaMA: Multi-modal music understanding and generation via large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2412.06660. Jiasen Lu, Christopher Clark, Sangho Lee, Zichen Zhang, Savya Khosla, Ryan Marten, Derek Hoiem, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. 2024. Unified-IO 2: Scal-ing autoregressive multimodal models with vision, language, audio, and action. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 26439–26455. Ziyang Ma, Yinghao Ma, Yanqiao Zhu, Chen Yang, Yi-Wen Chao, Ruiyang Xu, Wenxi Chen, Yuanzhe Chen, Zhuo Chen, Jian Cong, Kai Li, Keliang Li, Siyou Li, Xinfeng Li, Xiquan Li, Zheng Lian, Yuzhe Liang, Minghao Liu, Zhikang Niu, and 15 others. 2025. MMAR: A challenging benchmark for deep reasoning in speech, audio, music, and their mix. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (NeurIPS) .Ziyang Ma, Ruiqi Yan, Ruiyang Xu, Jie Fang, Zhikang Niu, Yi-Wen Chao, Wenming Tu, Tianrui Wang, Auden, Qi Chen, Wenxi Chen, Jiaying Chi, Yanru Huo, Zixuan Jiang, Xiquan Li, Yalin Li, Junxi Liu, Minghao Liu, Binghao Qiang, and 19 others. 2026. MMAE: A massive multitask audio editing bench-mark. Preprint , arXiv:2606.07229. Hila Manor and Tomer Michaeli. 2024. Zero-shot unsu-pervised and text-based audio editing using DDPM inversion. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of 

PMLR , pages 34603–34629. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brock-man, Christine Mcleavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak su-pervision. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of 

PMLR , pages 28492–28518. S Sakshi, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Ashish Seth, Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Oriol Nieto, Ramani Duraiswami, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. 2025. MMAU: A massive multi-task audio under-standing and reasoning benchmark. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR) .Ye Tao, Wen Wu, Chao Zhang, Mengyue Wu, Shuai Wang, and Xuenan Xu. 2025. MMEDIT: A unified framework for multi-type audio editing via audio language model. Preprint , arXiv:2512.20339. Jinchuan Tian, Sang-gil Lee, Zhifeng Kong, Sreyan Ghosh, Arushi Goel, Chao-Han Huck Yang, Wen-liang Dai, Zihan Liu, Hanrong Ye, Shinji Watan-abe, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, Rafael Valle, and Wei Ping. 2026a. UALM: Unified audio language model for understanding, generation and reasoning. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Zeyue Tian, Binxin Yang, Zhaoyang Liu, Jiexuan Zhang, Ruibin Yuan, Hubery Yin, Qifeng Chen, Chen Li, Jing Lyu, Wei Xue, and Yike Guo. 2026b. Audio-Omni: Extending multi-modal understanding to ver-satile audio generation and editing. In SIGGRAPH 2026 .Nik Vaessen. 2025. JiWER: Evaluate your speech-to-text system with similarity measures such as WER. GitHub repository, version 4.0.0. Chenlong Wang, Yuhang Chen, Zhihan Hu, Dongping Chen, Wenhu Chen, Sarah Wiegreffe, and Tianyi Zhou. 2026a. Quantifying the gap between under-standing and generation within unified multimodal models. Preprint , arXiv:2602.02140. Dingdong Wang, Junan Li, Jincenzi Wu, Dongchao Yang, Xueyuan Chen, Tianhua Zhang, and Helen Meng. 2026b. MMSU: A massive multi-task spoken language understanding and reasoning benchmark. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Hui Wang, Cheng Liu, Junyang Chen, Haoze Liu, Yuhang Jia, Shiwan Zhao, Jiaming Zhou, Haoqin Sun, Hui Bu, and Yong Qin. 2026c. TTA-Bench: A comprehensive benchmark for evaluating text-to-audio models. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 40(39):33512–33520. Weixing Wang, Liudvikas Zekas, Anton Hackl, Con-stantin Alexander Auga, Parisa Shahabinejad, Jona Otholt, Antonio Rueda-Toicen, and Gerard de Melo. 2026d. Beyond accuracy: Benchmarking cross-task consistency in unified multimodal models. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.25072. Yuancheng Wang, Zeqian Ju, Xu Tan, Lei He, Zhizheng Wu, Jiang Bian, and Sheng Zhao. 2023. AUDIT: Audio editing by following instructions with latent diffusion models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (NeurIPS) .Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, Yuchen Hui, Marianna Nezhurina, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov. 2023. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption augmentation. In IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) .Wulin Xie, Yi-Fan Zhang, Chaoyou Fu, Yang Shi, Bingyan Nie, Hongkai Chen, Zhang Zhang, Liang Wang, and Tieniu Tan. 2026. MME-Unify: A com-prehensive benchmark for unified multimodal under-standing and generation models. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Yunfei Chu, and Junyang Lin. 2025a. Qwen2.5-Omni technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.20215. Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, et al. 2025b. Qwen3-Omni technical report. Preprint , arXiv:2509.17765. Chao Yan, Boyong Wu, Peng Yang, Pengfei Tan, Guo-qiang Hu, Li Xie, Yuxin Zhang, Xiangyu (Tony) Zhang, Fei Tian, Xuerui Yang, Xiangyu Zhang, Daxin Jiang, Shuchang Zhou, and Gang Yu. 2025. Step-Audio-EditX technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.03601. Dongchao Yang, Yuanyuan Wang, Dading Chong, Songxiang Liu, Xixin Wu, and Helen Meng. 2026. UniAudio 2.0: A unified audio language model with text-aligned factorized audio tokenization. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.04683. Zhen Ye, Peiwen Sun, Jiahe Lei, Hongzhan Lin, Xu Tan, Zheqi Dai, Qiuqiang Kong, Jianyi Chen, Jiahao Pan, Qifeng Liu, Yike Guo, and Wei Xue. 2025. Codec does matter: Exploring the semantic shortcoming of codec for audio language model. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,39(24):25697–25705. Hanlin Zhang, Daxin Tan, Dehua Tao, Xiao Chen, Haochen Tan, and Linqi Song. 2026. SpeechEd-itBench: A bilingual multi-attribute benchmark for instruction-guided speech editing. Preprint ,arXiv:2606.01804. 

A Implementation and Inference Settings 

Every subject model runs locally on a sin-gle NVIDIA H100. Each model runs in its own isolated Python environment with its own torch/transformers pins to prevent dependency drift. Decoding seeds are fixed (seed = 0) wherever the backend exposes a seed. We set temperature to 0 only where scoring happens (the baseline judge and the ideal-generation solver); every other decoding value below — including every non-zero tempera-ture — is the model authors’ shipped default, left untuned. U G EModel Sp So Mu Sp So Mu Sp So Mu                                                                       

> Unified models considered in TORUS
> Audio-Omni (Tian et al., 2026b) G#G#
> UniAudio-2 (Yang et al., 2026) ###
> Audex-30B (Kong et al., 2026) ###
> Audex-2B (Kong et al., 2026) ###
> Unified-IO 2 (Lu et al., 2024) ###
> Models excluded due to limited coverage
> Qwen3-Omni (Xu et al., 2025b) #####
> Ming-Lite-Omni (Inclusion AI et al., 2025) G#G######
> MuMu-LLaMA (Liu et al., 2024) ######
> Cascaded Baseline specialist models
> Step-Audio-EditX (Yan et al., 2025) #######
> TangoFlux (Hung et al., 2026) ########
> MMEdit (Tao et al., 2025) ########
> ACE-Step 1.5 (Gong et al., 2026) ########
> gpt-audio G#G######

Table 3: Capabilities per audio type (Sp/So/Mu) for understanding (U), generation (G) and editing (E), assessed from each model’s paper and model card: claimed or evaluated; G# incidental mention only; # never mentioned; — not assessed. 

Algorithm 1 A self-coherence test as presented in TORUS                                                      

> Require: unified model with heads G,U
> Require: prompts pgen , p edit , p cf ;question sets
> Qgen , Q edit , Q cf
> Withheld from the model: specs, keys, transcripts 1: agen ←G(pgen )▷Render Phase 2: aedit ←G(pedit , a gen )▷closed loop: edits own output 3: acf ←G(pcf , a edit )
> 4: for s∈ { gen ,edit ,cf }do
> 5: for all q∈Qsdo ▷|Qs|= 3
> 6: ˆyq←U(as, q )▷Evaluate Phase 7: end for
> 8: end for
> 9: return P
> s,q ⊮[ˆ yq=yq]▷deterministic letter match

Shared protocol. Every evaluated system (cas-caded and unified) both generates the audio and answers the nine spec-keyed six-option questions on its own clips with its own understanding head (or specialized listener). Stage 1 generates from the stage-1 prompt; Stages 2 and 3 edit the pre-vious clip natively (Audio-Omni) or through the self-caption chain (Section 4.3). Options are shuf-fled deterministically per item and the correct letter recorded from the shuffled order. No ASR or CLAP sits in the question-scoring layer: grading is an ex-act letter match. Refer to Fig. 2 and 6 to better understand the evaluation strategy for all evaluated systems. 

Audex-30B and Audex-2B. The generation head is served with vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) over the audio LM with the released X-Codec detokeniz-ers (Ye et al., 2025); decoding uses temperature 1.0, top-p 1.0, top-k 80, maximum 2,048 new tokens, classifier-free guidance at scale 3.0, full precision (fp16 off), tensor-parallel size 1; output is 16 kHz mono. The understanding head decodes with 60– 64 maximum new tokens, temperature 0.7, top-p

0.9, top-k 0. Audex-2B fits both heads co-resident on one H100; 

Audio-Omni. A frozen Qwen2.5-Omni (Xu et al., 2025a) reasoning stack drives a diffusion-transformer audio head from a single checkpoint. Generation (text-to-audio and native audio-in edit) uses 100 diffusion steps, CFG scale 7.0, and a fixed 10 s duration (the audio-input conditioner is fixed to ∼10 s of mel frames), seed 0; output is writ-ten at the model’s native 44.1 kHz as 16-bit PCM. The same checkpoint’s understanding head answers each question on the model’s own generated clip. The two reported arms (native edit and self-caption) differ only in how stages 2–3 obtain the previous clip; scoring is identical. 

UniAudio-2. The released LLM checkpoint de-codes with greedy top-1 and no CFG into the Rea-soningCodec decoder (10 codec inference steps), with the Llama-3.2 text tokenizer; output is 16 kHz mono. Generation runs as text-to-audio task over all tests per stage; the self-caption step uses the model’s audio-caption task. Question answering is a single-load resident pass in which each clip is Figure 6: Benchmarking pipeline for a self-coherence test in TORUS for unified models that lack native audio-editing. We resort to a self-caption edit chain as shown above. G and U may be substituted with specialized models to construct the Cascaded Baseline. 

encoded once and all of its questions are answered before moving on. 

Unified-IO 2. The uio2-xxl checkpoint (7B) is built from its released configuration and weights and run in eval mode on CUDA with the released preprocessor and tokenizer. Generation calls the library’s audio-generation task at library-default de-coding; output is squeezed to 16 kHz mono. Stage 1 generates from the prompt alone; stages 2–3 con-dition on the model’s own caption of the previous clip. 

Cascaded-baseline generation and editing mod-els. The baseline’s audio is produced by four spe-cialists, routed by audio type so that each test sees exactly one generator/editor and one listener: • TangoFlux (515M; ∼1.0B with its text en-coder) sound generation • ACE-Step 1.5 (3.85B) music generation • Step-Audio-EditX (3.53B) speech generation and editing • MMEdit (0.62B, measured from the released checkpoint) sound and music editing All four run at their authors’ default settings. Across the bank the cascade draws on ∼8.5B gener-ative parameters in total (excluding text encoders), though never all at once. 

Cascaded-baseline judge. The cascaded base-line’s questions are answered by a frontier audio-understanding judge over an audio-in API, decod-ing at temperature 0 (3,000-token cap). We consid-ered gpt-audio and gemini-3.1-pro-preview 

here since they are the latest SOTA MLLMs that accept audio as input. The judge was se-lected by agreement with the authors’ own an-swers on a 40-question sample (sampled uniformly at random across stages and audio types) that the authors solved by listening to the baseline clips. gpt-audio matches the authors’ answers on 75.0% questions while gemini-3.1-pro-preview 

matches on only (47.5%) questions. This experi-ment helped us choose the frontier understanding model used in this work. gpt-audio reconciles with human judgement more often and was thus chosen to be part of the Cascaded Baseline. The Cascaded Baseline is constructed as the strongest pipeline assemblable from today’s spe-cialized systems, not as a capability-matched con-trol. Each role is filled by the best available model for it: frontier audio-understanding for listening (gpt-audio), and specialized systems for generation and editing (Fig. 2), where no frontier-scale equiv-alent exists. The baseline therefore marks an upper reference line for what specialist pipelines achieve on TORUS today. 

Test-generation pipeline models. These mod-els build and diagnose the bank; none are scored as subjects. The test architect and question au-thor are gemini-3.5-flash accessed via API. The ideal-generation solver of the coupled gate is a text-only frontier model ( gpt-5.6-luna )accessed via API. The muted-audio solver is 

Audio-Flamingo-Next (Ghosh et al., 2026), run locally on an H100 GPU with default settings. 

B Benchmark Comparison: Per-Cell Evidence 

Protocol cells of Table 1 were assigned from each paper’s construction and evaluation sec-tions; one line of evidence per row. MMAU / MMAU-Pro : deterministically scored MCQs with fixed keys; blind and text-only baselines reported as post-hoc diagnostics, not construction filters; MMAU-Pro mixes in judge-scored open-ended items ( •). ADQA-Bench : questions filtered at con-struction by an audio-dependency check ( ✓ leak-checked). CompA : paired order/attribute-swapped items whose answer must flip ( ✓ counterfactual); accuracy-scored with fixed keys, no blind control. 

RiTTA : rule-based relation scoring through a neu-ral event detector (no sealed deterministic key). 

TTA-Bench : CLAP/aesthetics/human ratings, no per-item key. SpeechEditBench / MMAE : rubric-and judge-scored editing; MMAE chains depen-dent multi-stage edits. MME-Unify : unify tasks scored as MCQs, with keys derived from provided material; Visual CoT chains dependent steps. Um-niBench : every case chains generate → interact 

→ counterfactual on the model’s own image ( ✓

counterfactual); QA keys are derived directly from the prompt and the prompt is carried forward, so keys are prompt-recoverable ( ✗ leak-checked key); no no-image control is run. 

C Extended Stage and Phase Analysis 

Stage trends per model. Stage 2 measures au-dio editing more rigorously, while Stage 3 tests counterfactual reasoning, so a model with S3 >

S2 exhibits stronger audio reasoning than editing. The Cascaded Baseline shows this rebound most clearly (50.7% → 65.3%), which we attribute to its specialized audio reasoning models and their strong text priors; Audio-Omni and Audex-2B exhibit the same shape. Audex-30B instead de-cays gradually across stages. UniAudio-2 and Unified-IO 2 are near-flat at 20–25% throughout— statistically above chance ( ∼16.7%)—indicating weaker generation and self-knowledge rather than a stage-specific failure. The contrast between Audex-30B and Audex-2B is also instructive: Audex-30B utilizes a more capable MoE backbone and was trained on a larger mix of audio–text data, which not only lifts it above Audex-2B and the other uni-fied models at all stages but also yields a different trend shape. 

Render Phase details. On WER, Unified-IO 2 achieves the lowest rate (0.952), followed by Audex-2B, Audio-Omni, UniAudio-2 and Audex-30B. Audio-Omni’s two editing modes separate cleanly on FAD: native waveform editing degrades the signal statistics (FAD 8.41) where regenerating from its own caption does not (FAD 6.35), yet Coherence remains roughly similar across both modes—editing artifacts harm render statistics without changing self-coherence. Audex-2B sits at or near the bottom of every distance (KL 2.52, FAD 9.58, FD 0.80) while out-answering two sys-tems with better render statistics. Finally, we note that current specialized generators and editors are themselves not perfect; both unified and specialized systems must improve, since the Evaluate Phase can only be as good as the audio it receives. 

D Curation Pipeline Details 

Repair loop. A question is flagged iff the muted-audio solver answers it correctly or the ideal-generation solver misses it. Flagged questions re-turn to the Question Author for up to two repair rounds. In Round 1, the question author rewrites only the options to make them more plausible. If the question is re-flagged even after this, it enters Round 2, where the question and options are both diagnosed and revised. Questions still flagged af-ter both rounds proceed to human verification with their flags attached. 

E Human Evaluation: Protocol and Reliability 

Metrics. Preference (win) rate : the fraction of a model’s non-tie A/B trials in which raters pre-ferred its clip (wins/(wins+losses); chance 50%). 

Raw pairwise agreement : the fraction of shared items on which two raters gave identical labels, averaged over rater pairs (not chance-corrected). 

Cohen’s κ: chance-corrected pairwise agreement, reported as the mean over rater pairs. Fleiss’ κ: its generalization to the full rater group, our primary reliability statistic. Krippendorff’s α: a chance-corrected coefficient robust to any number of raters, reported in nominal form on the binary non-tie re-sponses. Under the Landis–Koch bands, our values (0.377–0.442) fall in the fair-to-moderate range, the expected and publishable regime for subjective perceptual A/B judgments. Including ties as a third category: raw agreement 56.8%, Fleiss κ = 0.303, Krippendorff α = 0.303. Ties were 49 of 315 trials (16%).